
Maho, a.k.a “blood magic”, is any form of magic outlawed by the Emperor.  The practice of maho is punishable by death.

There is a difference between tsukai and bloodspeakers, though many people use the terms interchangeably.

A “tsukai” is a witch, i.e. anyone who practices maho. All tsukai are infected with the Shadowlands taint as part of their practice of witchcraft, and this taint is detectable, especially by shugenja, who can detect the taint by communing with the elemental kami.

A “bloodspeaker” is a specific type of tsukai who has the supernatural ability to conceal the Shadowlands taint. Shugenja are unable to overcome this - even the most powerful shugenja who are the most in-tune with the elemental kami cannot detect the Shadowlands taint when concealed by a well-trained bloodspeaker. Witch Hunters have a form of Detect Taint which is sometimes able to overcome a bloodspeaker’s taint-concealing abilities, though even this is unreliable, and more powerful Bloodspeakers can usually evade this.  The good news is that if an entire suspected coven is rounded up, the Witch Hunters usually only have to be successful 1 time in order for the coven to be found out.

Notably, a bloodspeaker can no longer conceal the taint in their body after they’re dead, so one surefire way for a Witch Hunter or shugenja to tell for sure if someone is tainted is to kill them and then check. This is only done in extraordinary circumstances, as Imperial law forbids the mass killing of peasants simply to root out a single individual.

Remember: all bloodspeakers are tsukai, but not all tsukai are bloodspeakers. (In other words, there are some tsukai out in the countryside who cannot conceal their taint, and if they ever draw attention to themselves they will be easily found out.)

The Office of the Jade Champion is in charge of the Kuni Witch Hunters, who are responsible for hunting tsukai. There are about 200 Witch Hunters in the Empire, so while smaller domains don’t have a Witch Hunter, most domains do.  (There are around 350 domains total.)

There are many different types of maho, because maho is not really a single practice – the textbook list of the 7 maho disciplines for Witch hunters and other authorities to watch out for are:

→ Shadowlands taint magic:

This is the basis of most tsukai practices, and witches are able to take on additional Shadowlands taint in order to give themselves extra powers, strengthening themselves or cursing others through the direct application of channeled Shadowlands energy. Some textbooks list this discipline as "Curses", but this is misleading because taking on Shadowlands taint has other applications such as increasing a tsukai’s physical prowess, which is why it’s more correctly listed as the general Shadowlands taint magic.

→ Name magic:

Tsukai gain power based on the strength of their own name, and based on the strength of names they take. Many spells and rituals involve sacrificing a name.

Tsukai are interesed in taking the names of others – they must merely ask you to give them your name and have you answer by stating your name. When this has been repeated 3 times in succession the tsukai owns your name.

Name magic was not originally considered a maho discipline until Hantei Iuchiban became the first bloodspeaker and used name magic to corrupt the officer corps of the 1st Imperial Legion.

→ Wound magic:

Tsukai practice bloodletting of themselves and of victims in order to fuel their magic. Any human magic driven by wounds is considered maho. (Ratling shamans sometimes practice ritual bloodletting, but this has been classified as non-maho because of the special nature of Ratlings and the fact that they are biologically incapable of carrying the Shadowlands taint.)

→ Summoning:

One of the most famous tsukai abilities, this is most notably used to summon oni from jigoku, but is also used to summon mujina (jigoku trickster spirits), kansen (corrupted kami/spirits), zombies (given a supply of corpses), ghosts, etc.

→ Crafting:

The most famous items crafted by tsukai are obsidian blades, and they also create totems which they use to store power they generate from sacrificial rituals. In theory tsukai can make all manner of interesting things, though this usually involves the sacrifice of some other object which itself already had great name.  For example, the creation of an obsidian sword requires the sacrifice of a sword whose name is itself very famous, as it is the strength of the original sword's name which serves as the source of power for the creation of the obsidian blade.

→ Dark Divinination:

Tsukai can learn secrets from those whose names they know, starting always with what they fear, desire, and regret. Such knowledge is often the basis for subsequent curses.  It is for this reason that Witch Hunters rarely tell anyone their true name.  Instead, they choose a name for themselves at their gempukku but only declare that name at the ceremony, and then assume a false name for their entire lives.

This practice is regarded with extreme suspicion, as many people who are experts in the connections between the living and their ancestors have credibly claimed that it prevents Witch Hunters from being able to be guided by their ancestors, or from having their deeds echo through the realm of the honored dead.  However, this has never been proven, nor has the Imperial Ministry of Rites or the Office of the Jade Champion ever taken any position on this matter.

→ Fleshshaping:

One of the least common areas of maho, this is most famously used by the Kadi sorcerers of Medin al Salaat, who give themselves inhuman features and abilities by changing their own bodies. This is significantly less common in Rokugan, since that’s kind of a giveaway which would prevent them from remaining hidden among the peasant population, though particularly malicious tsukai may inflict horrific disfigurement on victims they capture.

While many maho practices involve only 1 of the maho disciplines, the most powerful tsukai perform rituals which combine several disciplines and usually require several practitioners. For example, consider summoning an oni:

→ It requires so much blood to be shed that an entire coven is usually required, since a single tsukai would be killed by the wounds.

→ It requires so much Shadowlands taint to be channeled that it would overwhelm any one tsukai and drive them mad or worse.

→ It requires the sacrifice of a name of considerable weight (Recognition) to give the oni the ability to inhabit this realm.

→ It's the most difficult of the summoning arts, requiring a tsukai who has already mastered the lesser forms of summoning.

This combines 4 of the 7 maho disciplines, and most maho rituals are similar in that regard.

There are also some forms of maho which do not actually involve the Shadowlands taint or the shedding of blood. For example, there are many things a shugenja could theoretically do to empower their magic through the taking and sacrificing of names. However, this is banned, as Name magic is one of the 7 maho disciplines outlawed by Imperial decree.

One of the earliest works of literature about the early days of the Empire is the court historian Hantei Kajimitsu’s “History of Early Rokugan”, which opens with this description:

"Before the rise of our Great Ancestors humanity amounted to little. Their hands ran red with blood, they ate ravenously the flesh of animals, and their bodies were unbathed and ungroomed. The original religious practices of the unguided peasants included the worship of local gods and minor fortunes who could bless families and land with fertility, prosperity and good fortune or wrack them with disasters and sterility. Maho cults also existed and although not all human beings practiced maho, the practice of maho was both commonplace and accepted. Ancient maho practices were identical to modern maho, except that they were commonplace and not illegalized. Using sacrifices of blood and children, cultists sought to appease the dark gods of Jigoku and yield crops from the soil. Because agricultural techniques of the early humans were undeveloped, the thirst of the soil for their blood was great."

The Great Ancestors who founded the 7 Great Clans required that any warlord who swore fealty to them foreswear the practices of maho and make it illegal in their domains. However, as Hantei Kajimitsu later mentions:

"Although maho was made illegal after the founding of the Empire, it is unfortunately the case that some of the subjects of the Hantei continue to practice unclean maho."

For centuries this practice was limited by the ability of shugenja to detect the Shadowlands taint. If a tsukai was performing unclean acts which spread the Shadowlands taint within a city, then a shugenja could be dispatched to seek out its source and kill any tsukai they found. While some tsukai persisted in trying to remain hidden in large cities, most tsukai remained in the countryside, far away from the prying gaze of most shugenja. Unless their practices spread so much corruption that it rose to the government’s notice or their peasant neighbors dared to report them to the authorities, tsukai covens could operate undetected for many generations.

Most countryside tsukai know very little of maho – because its practice is heretical it is difficult for them to study together or share their knowledge widely. Hedge-witch tsukai of the countryside usually know only a few spells and rites. The most common practice is to use flesh-altering abilities to heal sickness or injuries in their peasant neighbors, often in exchange for the names of their “patients”. A few learn how to curse their enemies, even fewer know how to create blood-artifacts of any power, and fewer still know the art of summoning oni.

The corruption of the Shadowlands taint interferes with other magics, and shugenja who attempt to wield maho quickly find that their connection to the elemental kami weakens and even goes away completely, and they lose their ability to call upon the elements.  This makes shugenja inherently somewhat trustworthy on the question of maho, because if they were doing things like summoning oni, then they would lose the source of their power, and they are able to prove that they have not turned into tsukai simply by casting one of their ordinary elemental spells.

This distinction also speaks to the ways in which maho practices were the original religion practiced by the peasantry of Rokugan before the founding of the Empire.  In many ways, the tsukai of today are simply continuing to practice the religion of their ancestors.  This is heretical and illegal, but it explains why so many are open to the idea, for reasons other than just the power that it offers.

Isawa himself, who founded the Isawa family, is known to have practiced maho.  He created many totems using the crafting discipline, and performed rituals to store the power of the names and wounds of his defeated enemies in these totems through blood sacrifices.  It was Shiba who convinced him to set aside these ways for the future of the new Phoenix clan, though the Isawa family is rumored to maintain many texts on maho in their secret libraries, for the Phoenix clan values knowledge more highly than any other clan.







There is one extremely notable exception to the Phoenix clan's renunciation of the practice of maho.  Isawa Akuma was a shugenja in the Phoenix clan who lived in the 3rd century who was fascinated by maho.  He studied everything he could find on the subject and is said to have sought out tsukai, and rather than arresting them he offered to exchange his wisdom for theirs, learning from them and teaching them many of the hidden secrets of the Phoenix.

Akuma was the most cunning and intelligent members of the Phoenix clan, and eventually he was able to somehow discover how to wield maho without losing his spellcasting ability!  It is unknown how this is even possible - the elemental kami hate the Shadowlands taint above all else, and the abilities of a shugenja rely on the favor of the elemental kami.  A shugenja is not simply directing power themselves, but rather channeling their own chi in order to call upon the kami to answer their prayers.  And the kami would never respond to a man so deeply tainted as would be required for the practice of powerful maho.

Some have theorized that Akuma is so skilled that he has not defied this limitation, but rather has become so skilled at the practices of maho and spellcasting that he has managed to avoid taking so much Shadowlands taint as to become permanently tainted.  This would be a staggering accomplishment, as some of his feats of maho are so impressive that even the most famous tsukai would be nearly killed by the amount of taint involved, and because of this there are many who reject this theory.

Others have wondered whether Akuma has instead learned how to expel the Shadowlands taint from his body.  Perhaps he DOES lose his spellcasting ability for a time, but through intense self-control over his own body and chi he might have discovered a technique by which someone who has become "permanently" tainted can reverse this effect and recover back to an untainted state.  Others claim that this is even more ludicrous, as the taint is known to settle into a person's marrow, from which it spreads to the rest of the body through the blood, and there are no known principles by which this could possibly be reversed.

There are other theories as well, that Akuma abandons one body for another by being a disembodied spirit which possesses untainted victims and continues to wield his shugenja powers that way... that he has learned to wield some form of magic similar to shugenja control over the elements but distinct from it... etc.

Before Akuma's practice of maho became known, he journeyed deep into the Isawa Woodlands, far from prying eyes, and performed his greatest feat, using his own name to summon a powerful oni lord, Oni no Akuma.

This oni was so massive and powerful that it warped place in the Isawa Woodlands, creating a new "between place" coexistent between the mortal realm and Jigoku.  Because Akuma summoned an oni whose thirst for knowledge matched his own, this oni took the form of a great library, which is said to contain "all of the things that have ever been written, and many of the things which never were written, and more than a few things which will come to be written".

Akuma then set out to read through the sources of knowledge and power in this chaotic and disorganized library which was created by his oni and which is the oni.  Akuma himself was not able to control the oni - although most summoners are able to command the oni which they summon, such a powerful oni lord was required that it will respond to no human commands.  Thankfully for Akuma, this merely means that it treats him like any other visitor, offering its shelves full of nonsense and wisdom and madness and knowledge and lies and power to any who make their way to him.

Over the next few years, Akuma began to publish some of the greatest foundational works of scholarship the Empire had ever seen.  Many of the concepts behind vows I described earlier in our conversation are included in his book "On Vows to the Fortunes".  His work "On Soothsaying" contains the definitive classification and description of the various forms of augury and prophecy.  There are many other examples... and as his scholarship grew, so did the power of his name, and thus so did the oni which formed his Great Library.

Eventually the source of his knowledge was discovered, and his death warrant was signed, effectively exiling him.  This seemed to matter little to Akuma, who was happy to take refuge in his library.  The oni which protects the library and which is the library will not permit any who travel there to attack other visitors, and it would take an army to defeat it.  Unfortunately, that is challenging, because the library can never be found the same way twice.  All of the normal paths through the Isawa Woodlands which might lead one to the library have already been taken, and therefore travelers who seek it out must journey through more unusual routes, taking them in and out of the mortal realm in order to find their way there.

The Empire hoped that Akuma's oni would eventually pull itself into Jigoku after his death, but he surprised and defied the wishes of the Empire by attaining immortality.  He is one of only 3 shugenja confirmed to have ever accomplished this feat, the 2nd shugenja in the Empire's history to have done so (the 1st was Isawa no Naka Kuro, the Grand Master of the Elements, who dwells at the Temple of the Four Elements in the Spine of the World Mountains_.

It is unknown whether Akuma's apparently immortality is the result of absolute mastery over the elements, or because of his dark practices of maho.  Tsukai have been known to attain immortality and thus escape the cycle of death and rebirth through the absolute mastery of their fears, desires, and regrets.  Monks have been known to do so through reaching enlightenment.  Even mundane artisans have been said to have achieved immortality through complete devotion to their mundane crafts - the founder of the Kakita Academy was a poet who is said to still wander the Empire to this day, composing sublimely beautiful works of poetry about the wonders of the natural world around him.

Regardless, Akuma remains an entity at large in the world today.  Unlike most dangerous tsukai, he appears to mainly be interested in the pursuit of knowledge, and seems to have few political opinions and no desire for temporal power.  His works of scholarship are still copied and studied because of their well-established correctness, though he is believed to not be their true author, and is thought to have pilfered them from his Great Library.

It is for this reason that copies of books which he published always open with some version of this disclaimer:

"This book was originally published by Isawa Akuma, who was later discovered to have stolen it from the Great Library. It’s true authorship is unknown. Anyone who discovers a copy of this book without this disclaimer is ordered to report it to the office of the Jade Champion."

The thinking is that books he published such as "On Vows to the Fortunes" or "On Soothsaying" were written by someone who was never born, or possibly the books would have otherwise not come to be written for centuries, and Akuma found these text and published them, attributing them to himself, which fueled his name even further.  Some point out in private that this cannot be proven and he may have indeed written some or all of the works attributed to him, but few would dare to publicly contradict the Office of the Jade Champion.

What I just described is somewhat different than the character of Isawa Akuma as described in the original L5R published books, but I wanted to make the character explore the boundaries between the different magic systems which exist in Rokugan.  It's a case where I've established a principle and then introduced a seeming contradiction,  into a coherent world and system.







The Emperor’s second son at the end of the 5th century (~600 years ago) was Hantei Iuchiban. Like most second sons of the Emperor, Iuchiban commanded the 1st Imperial Legion to guard the Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands at Chai Sedo. As usual, this was for the purpose of “keeping him away from the temptation of entangling alliances with those who might seek to subvert authority of the crown prince”. However, Prince Iuchiban “craved the power that the Fortunes had fated his elder brother should have, and sought to gain it by maho” (citation Asahina Toshiro in “Trying Times”). To this end, he used his authority to acquire tomes about the functioning of maho, intending to learn its ways and wield it as an unexpected weapon in an eventual coup. This was also before trade with gaijin lands was banned after the Battle of White Stag, which happened 300 years later (which is ~300 years ago, as my current campaign takes place in the year 1129 of the Rokugani calendar), which made it much easier for Prince Iuchiban to send emmissaries to Medin al Salaat across the desert, seeking out the khadi of that city.

From his seat of authority at Chai Sedo, Iuchiban began gathering disciples to him. While most of his followers were killed when he launched his coup against his brother, the most powerful survived due to being able to return after the destruction of their bodies, and many remain at large in the Empire today. Most have taken the “Jama” name, which Iuchiban invented as a way to identify those in his service in a twisted perversion of a noble samurai name.

For reference, in my version of Rokugan, the format of a normal samurai name is “<family> no <house> <personal>”. For example, one of my player's characters is “Akodo no Sugiwara Natsuki”, marking him as being from the Sugiwara house of the Akodo family. The word “no” means “of”, and this part is generally omitted for people from the ruling house of a family. For example, we would usually just say “Kitsuki Tetsu” and only in extremely formal circumstances refer to “Kitsuki no Kitsuki Tetsu”. In less formal contexts, the Family name is often dropped – for example, we usually refer to “Shosuro no Seri Go” simply as “Seri Go”.

Jama names substitute the tsukai master who inducted the apprentice. Iuchiban’s followers have names like “Jama no Iuchiban Kohaku”, and his disciples have names like “Jama no Kohaku Jin”, etc.

Iuchiban surpassed all who brought maho knowledge to him, and many of his servants were directly responsible for learning and disseminating some specific maho practice.

This account differs somewhat from the original description of Iuchiban in the original L5R books, though I don't think I've actually changed all that much - mainly I've clarified and expanded upon details which were already present.

By way of background, I’ll list some of his most famous disciples, specifically the ones which are still alive and at large after all these centuries.  I'll start with Jama no Iuchiban Suru.

Before adopting the Jama name, Shiba no Iga Suru was the one who first brought maho texts to Iuchiban, particularly the writings of a mad Kuni shugenja who was driven to insanity from too much exposure to the taint while fighting the forces of the Shadowlands. It was these writings which began Iuchiban’s journey into the practice of maho. Together, the two of them conducted what prayers and rituals they could manage from reading these texts alone, but it soon became clear they needed more expertise.

Suru is notable for being one of the only remaining disciples of Iuchiban from the samurai caste, and to this day he is said to travel in noble circles, kidnapping and impersonating traveling samurai. He then uses this position to learn the fears, desires, and regrets of those in power, seeking out those who might be willing to give him their names in exchange for his aid in achieving their political ambitions. with the promise to never reveal his role in assisting them. Because of this secrecy, it’s unknown just how many of the political happenings of the Empire have involved Suru’s influence.

Suru ultimately uses the names of famous nobles to fuel powerful rituals. Suru was directly responsible for resurrecting Iuchiban, and the Great Famine of the 7th century is thought to be Suru’s doing. He has been killed many times but always resurrected by his allies and disciples.

Another terrifying disciple of Iuchiban is Jama Musume.  Unlike the others who have taken the Jama name, she does not add the "no Iuchiban" qualifier, on the basis that she herself originally instructed Iuchiban herself.

The writings of the mad Kuni shugenja brought to Iuchiban by Suru mentioned an old peasant tsukai-woman known as “the dark daughter of Fu Leng”. Suru sought her out and convinced her to come to their aid, teaching the ways of maho to the most trusted of Iuchiban’s retainers. While she began as Iuchiban’s instructor, he eventually surpassed her and taught her the maho disciplines she had previously lacked.

Musume assisted Iuchiban in his coup attempt, but was not killed, and was the only one of Iuchiban’s former lieutenants who was absent after his resurrection. She is known to live in the Shadowlands, where she occasionally ambushes Crab raiding parties. Instead of killing them, she takes their swords and and tells them a date and place at which they can reclaim them if they defeat her oni. Bushi will typically return to the Shadowlands with a small army, allowing them to easily defeat the oni and reclaim their lost swords. Unfortunately, this serves Musume’s purposes quite nicely, since the larger a force is brought, the more people learn of her name and carry the memory of her oni, thus further increasing her power.  (Remember that tsukai gain strength based on the number of people who know their name, especially when those people have strong emotional feelings of fear, desire, and or regret when thinking of that name.)

Musume is never present when these armies appear to kill Oni no Musume, since she has no need to be there in order for her purpose to be achieved. Instead, she can remain safely elsewhere, not putting herself at risk of the inconvenience of being slain, and indeed it is unclear whether she has ever been killed.

Another of Iuchiban's disciples is Asahina Yajinden.

Iuchiban’s plans could never have succeeded so long as the Shadowlands taint was so easily detected by shugenja. Convinced that there must exist some method by which the taint could be hidden, Iuchiban reached out to a smith of great renown, hoping that Yajinden could construct amulets capable of concealing the Shadowlands taint in its wearers. Although Yajinden failed in this effort, his research and collaboration with Iuchiban resulted in Iuchiban himself inventing the maho practice of concealing the Shadowlands taint from the divinations of shugenja.

Yajinden perfected the maho practice of crafting, and taught Iuchiban’s disciples how to use the names of objects as an alternative to the names of people – in particular he invented the method of sacrificing the name of a famous sword in order to create a cursed obsidian sword. Yajinden himself proceeded to create what have been described as the 4 most powerful obsidian blades ever smithed, known as the 4 “Bloodswords” (Ambition, Revenge, Judgement, and Passion) and was said to have been working on a 5th bloodsword (Treachery) when Iuchiban was defeated.

Yajinden was captured by the Emerald Champion after Iuchiban’s coup attempt. It’s unknown how he managed to escape, since his maho practices revolved almost entirely around crafting. Interestingly, his escape was reported to have occurred many years later, implying that he was not immediately put to death, and Yajinden is said to have assisted the Emperor’s advisors in containing the spirit of Iuchiban to prevent him from being resurrected. However, after managing to escape, Yajinden is said to manufacture obsidian swords and other maho artifacts for bloodspeakers, and train their brightest maho-smith apprentices on how to do the same.

I have much more written about Yajinden, but one thing to note for future reference is that often when telling these kinds of histories, the information is supposed to be somewhat unreliable.  This is what people believe to be true, and most of it is true, but there may be individual parts of the story which is later revealed to be falsehoods spread for some political or religious purpose.  My intention is to have Rokugan be a place whose history books are not entirely reliable, just as modern historians regard many ancient sources as having their own biases and inaccuracies.







One of the most famous disciples of Iuchiban is Jama no Iuchiban Kyoso.

Known as “queen of oni”, Kyoso began as a legionnaire in the 1st Imperial Legion from either the Kitsu family of the Lion or the Yogo family of the Scorpion. (Each family disclaims her, and there are credible historical accounts supporting her ancestry from either family.) Kyoso quickly mastered the lesser summonings taught by the maho texts of Jama Suru and the teachings of Jama Musume, easily summoning swamp spirits and mujina and kansen. Kyoso’s intuitions about these practices changed how humans understood oni summoning. It was Kyoso who explained that oni require a name to be summoned, not as payment, but because nothing without a name can exist in our realm. The name is what permits the oni to possess a physical form, and the nature of the oni’s form in Jigoku therefore has even more effect on the form it takes in our realm as any material components used to anchor its spirit to a physicality in our reality.

Kyoso made further discoveries in the practice of oni summoning. Prior to her, any tsukai who wished to summon an oni required either their own name or a name which someone chose to give to them. While blood sacrifices had previously allowed tsukai to use the names of sacrifical victims, it was Kyoso who discovered how to use the name of someone at the moment of their death to summon an oni. For centuries, this has allowed bloodspeakers to summon oni using the names of victims who would die rather than surrender their own names, even under torture. This has led to the targeting of countless samurai by bloodspeaker covens over the years, as the protection of righteousness and indomitable will no longer prevents your name from helping a bloodspeaker’s summonings.

Kyoso’s other discovery was even more significant, which is that of “dismissing” and “recalling” oni. Prior to her, a tsukai who summoned an oni would have to find somewhere to keep it. Even out in the countryside, this could spread its taint to the countryside enough to be noticed. Even worse, a traveling tsukai who kept their oni close enough to come to their defense would almost certainly be seen. Kyoso discovered that it was possible to send a summoned oni back into Jigoku, and then recall it at a moment’s notice. This process of recall needs far less preparation and ritual than the initial summoning, though it still requires a great expenditure of resources – typically a name almost as large as the one used to summon the oni, or many lesser names, or some combination of names, Shadowlands taint, and wounds. Even worse, Kyoso is said to have further refined this process to allow the oni itself to return when certain conditions are met, such as the death of the bloodspeaker who summoned it – this means that even when a powerful bloodspeaker is taken by surprise and beheaded instantly, their attackers may still have to fight their oni afterwards.

The final bloodspeaker I've written extensive backstory for in the "rogues' gallery" of Iuchiban lieutenants is an entirely original creation - all of the others are mostly or loosely based on characters from original L5R.  I have extensive notes about him because he has actually appeared as a character in some of my past L5R adventures while I've been a GM, Jama no Iuchiban Kohaku:

Kohaku was a traveling monk whose pilgrimage brought him to Chai Sedo (the temple at the Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands, which is itself a narrow valley in the Twilight Mountains on the western side of the Empire) while Iuchiban was stationed there as the general of the 1st Imperial Legion. With Iuchiban’s influence, Kohaku was made the abbot of Chai Sedo, based on his scholarly acumen and understanding of the Tao. It was Kohaku who Iuchiban dispatched as an emmissary to Medin al Salaat to seek out the underground khadi who were still forced by the Ki Rin to stay hidden and make deals from the shadows. Kohaku succeeded in mastering their ways, even learning the khadi secret of removing one’s heart, which he returned to teach to Iuchiban and his fellow disciples.

Interestingly, Jama no Kohaku Jin told the PCs during my previous campaign that removing one’s heart does not grant immortality, and that instead it is the mastery of one’s fears, desires, and regrets which does that. He indicated that the removal of the heart helps you attain this mastery, but that most who perform the ritual are still mortal and their removed heart will stop beating when their body dies. Jin claimed that there is some amount of life extension and resistance to wounds and age and sickness which is granted by the ritual, but that the common beliefs about heart-removal are mistaken.  This is something I've already alluded to - the common belief is that bloodspeakers attain immortality by removing their hearts and keeping them somewhere safe, but in actuality it is about mastering their fears, desires, and regrets.

After Iuchiban’s defeat, while Jama Suru proceeded to recruit and gain power from noble samurai, Jama Kohaku recruited peasants. He is known to have personally sought out countryside tsukai and from all over the Empire and taught them how to conceal the Shadowlands taint, allowing them to expand their covens and migrate from the countryside into larger cities without being found. Because of his focus on evangelism to the peasantry, more bloodspeaker covens broken up by Witch Hunters have been linked to Kohaku than any other bloodspeaker.

When a powerful oni lord known as The Maw gathered an army within the Shadowlands, it was Kohaku who combined explosives with powerful maho to blast a hole in the Kaiu Wall, allow the Maw to invade the Empire. Even worse, Kohaku diverted a Shadowlands river through the opened hole in the Kaiu wall, flooding and tainting the Hiruma countryside, which ultimately prevented the Crab from reclaiming Hiruma castle after the Maw was defeated at the Battle of Cresting Wave.

After Iuchiban was defeated, his soul was bound to the Forgotten Tomb. Jama Suru performed unknown rituals to break it free, but it was Jama Kohaku who used his khadi-trained flesh-shaping abilities to construct a new body for Iuchiban’s spirit to inhabit. Kohaku continued to serve as one of Iuchiban’s trusted lieutenants until Iuchiban’s second death at the Battle of Sleeping River.

More recently, Kohaku appeared at Kyuden Hida on the most recent Day of Thunder. The Seven Thunders defeated the dark avatar of Lord Moon, Shinja Jotsu, before Kohaku could arrive. Kohaku proceeded to take revenge on behalf of Shinjo Jotsu, declaring himself an ally of the Moon Cult, and urging all cultists to travel to Kyuden Shinjo, where the moon cult was still strong. This led directly to the overthrow of Shinjo Yokatsu, who turned out to be a moon cultist. The Lion Clan felt this did not go far enough, and invaded Unicorn lands with the declared intention to drive out any remaining moon cultists once and for all, though they were defeated after Shinja Hanari called in the Moto, who defeated the invading Ikoma armies of the Lion Clan at the Battle of Dark Edge Village.

At least, that's what is generally known and believed.  Jama no Kohaku Jin now claims that the overthrow of the moon cult in Shinjo lands was his idea, and that he asked “master Haku” (which is what he calls Kohaku) to declare his allegiance to the moon cult and reveal its stronghold in Kyuden Shinjo specifically to cause “the samurai” to destroy it. Bloodspeakers are known to often take credit for such things, though it’s still a plausible story, since as Shiba Tsuchida pointed out, “it’s a perfect example of how evil feeds upon itself”. Then again, it could just as easily be an attempt by Jin to cover up an embarrassing mistake.

An even more recent event indirectly linked to Kohaku was the exploits of one of his other apprentices, Jama no Kohaku Hoshiko, who was known to be with Jama Kohaku on the recent Day of Thunder. For years, a historian assigned to the post of Ratling agent for the 3rd Imperial Legion by Kyuden Hida helped samurai track down the lost swords of people’s fallen ancestors who died in the Shadowlands. One day, after a man named Kakita Hio won such a duel with his recovered ancestor’s sword, a mujina appeared and declared that all of these recovered swords had been cursed by Jama no Kohaku Hoshiko, and the mujina named the date and place within the Shadowlands where those who wished could seek revenge and break the curse by slaying the oni through which the curse was bound. (Hoshiko has evidently learned the technique from Jama Musume of convincing samurai to spread her name for their own purposes, thus empowering her.)

When a small army showed up on the date in question, Oni no Hoshiko was indeed slain, but evidently Hoshiko had also studied the techniques of Jama Kyoso and managed to summon/form a rust oni which was speficially able to ruin swords. While many were wounded, not one samurai died in the fight against the oni, yet every sword carried by all members of the attacking army were ruined beyond repair. This gives each member of the army a right of vengeance against Jama no Kohaku Hoshiko, which permits them to spread her name when done so in the furtherance of their search for her, which is how many well-informed people would know her name, especially those who keep abreast of such matters. Hoshiko is an excellent example of how modern bloodspeakers often combine the teachings of many of Iuchiban’s disciples - in her case Kohaku, Musume, and Kyoso - in order to wield their power more effectively.







Here's what I've written up about the history of Iuchiban's coup attempts and the fallout they generated:

Iuchiban’s coup:

Armed with the ability to infiltrate the capital without their maho being detected, Iuchiban and his disciples journeyed to Otosan Uchi. They slowly began to raise the bodies of the honored dead in the Imperial crypt underneath Otosan Uchi, with the intention to mount a surprise attack on the Imperial court. At the same time, they began quietly abducting members of the Imperial Chancellary whose names they used to power their spells and rituals.

This was ultimately discovered before their preparations were complete, and a group of investigators drawn from the each of the 7 Great Clans uncovered Iuchiban’s activities and slew him in the resulting battle before he could escape. The similarities between this event and the original Day of Thunder were not lost on people afterwards, and it was an open question for many years whether this event was another Day of Thunder. The implications are not trivial – if the original Day of Thunder established the supremacy of humanity for all time, then the stakes of such conflicts are more localized in time and place. But if humanity needs to periodically renew the Prophecy of the Age of Man (in which the Shinsei revealed that the Fortunes favor mortal man), then humanity’s future as a species is not guaranteed.

The Imperial Ministry of Rites took no direct position on this question, though many individual Imperial Ministers of Rites over the years dismissed the question as ludicrous. Recently the prophet Baiten declared that the Day of Thunder was at hand. Prince Fukuhashi, who oversaw the city of Toshi Ranbo at the time, reported that he narrowly prevented the assassination of the prophet Baiten, who was later found to have been murdered at the order of Shinjo Jotsu, the leader of the moon cult. Shinjo Jotsu’s later defeat was later revealed to be another Day of Thunder, prompting the Imperial Ministry of Rites to declare that Days of Thunder are indeed periodic events. Interestingly, the Imperial Ministry of Rites has not yet retroactively declared Iuchiban’s coup to be the Second Day of Thunder, though the growing consensus seems to be that this is obviously the case.

Because Iuchiban could not be permanently killed, the Emperor’s advisors managed to bind his soul to a prison in the Forgotten Tomb, preventing his resurrection for so long as his soul remained bound there.  While bloodspeakers who have removed their hearts and conquered their fears, desires, and regrets are able to resurrect themselves, Iuchiban's imprisonment was designed to prevent this possibility.

Bloodspeakers and Witch Hunters:

As a reminder, “tsukai” is the general term for a practitioner of maho. However, once Iuchiban developed the technique of concealing the Shadowlands taint, those tsukai who are able to conceal the taint became known as “bloodspeakers”. As we've previously discussed, all bloodspeakers are tsukai, but not all tsukai are bloodspeakers. 

This distinction led to a new urban phenomenon of bloodspeakers in cities, who were able to take advantage of dense populations to acquire more power and commit bolder acts against samurai than they could perform in the countryside. Kidnappings, murders, and larger rituals (especially on certain busy festival days) are all common.  Whereas tsukai in the days before Iuchiban were a rural phenomenon, since they could not operate in large population centers without being found by shugenja.

To combat this new bloodspeaker threat, a new Office of the Jade Champion was founded, which oversaw a new type of magistrate called “Witch Hunters”. Trained from a young age by being repeatedly exposed to the Shadowlands taint from early childhood, those Witch Hunters who survive this training are both immune to the Shadowlands taint and able to detect it even in bloodspeakers who try to conceal it. Unfortunately, this detection is not perfect, and the powerful bloodspeakers have only a small chance of being detected. Fortunately, if an entire coven is suspected, it’s likely that at least one member will fail to escape detection, and once a single bloodspeaker is found, they can reveal the identities of the others – though the identities of their coven members is often obvious based on who they spend their time consorting with.

Witch Hunters quickly grew in number and importance in order to fight against the rapid spread of bloodspeaker covens. At one point, the Hantei Emperor ordered a Witch Hunter placed in every domain capital in the Empire, with these magistrates of the Jade Champion being given jurisdiction to investigate any reports of tsukai activity anywhere. Some of these orders were later rescinded for reasons described below, and the power and influence of Witch Hunters has waxed and waned over the centuries according to the needs of the Empire.

The Gozoku:

Some Hantei Emperors need to take strong action and be closely involved in political matters throughout the Empire. Other Emperors preside over periods of prosperity which require little of their attention. During one such period, five families of the Empire collaborated to effectively seize control of the Imperial Chancellary, ensuring that their cabal were the true decisionmakers in most matters decided in the Imperial capital. Some players may have noticed that a few of the Companies in the 1st Imperial Legion are not from the ruling houses of their respective families. Those families were members of the Gozuku, and were so powerful that they obtained more wealth and influence than even the houses which ostensibly ruled them.

In case it matters for future reference, the five families of the Gozoku are:

1) The Isawa family of the Phoenix clan, which is ruled not by a daimyo but by the Council of Elemental Masters. Shiba the Great Ancestor who founded the Phoenix clan bent his knee to Isawa at the dawn of the Empire in order to show his devotion to the Empire and gain Isawa as a vassal, and the Isawa have always had final say over Phoenix clan affairs, when they choose to exercise it.

2) The Doji family of the Crane clan. Every Emperor since the dawn of the Empire has married a Doji bride, and Doji courtiers have always maintained control over the Imperial courts as the ruling family of the Crane.

3) The Tsume vassal house of the Doji family. The northernmost domain in Doji lands, Tsume lands border both the Lion and Phoenix clans, and in times of war the Tsume daimyo has often been granted the position of “General of the Northern Armies of the Crane”. This was not true in recent years, when Tsume Retsu invaded the city of Toshi Ranbo, ultimately kicking off the Lion/Crane war, much to the displeasure of the rest of the Crane clan.

4) The Bayushi family of the Scorpion clan. Just as the Lion and Crane clans are said to be the Emperor’s right and left hands in times of war (this being reversed in times of peace), the Scorpion are said always be the Emperor’s underhand, and the Bayushi have always administered the Scorpion through equal parts rulership and spycraft.

5) The Michio house of the Shosuro family of the Scorpion clan. While the largest city in the Empire is its capital of Otosan Uchi, the second largest city of Ryoko Owari lies next to Beiden Pass where the 2nd Imperial Legion is stationed, separating Lion and Scorpion lands. This is the hub of all trade in the central Empire, and lies just north of the best lands for silk cultivation.

Hantei the 16th:

Eventually the time came for the Hantei Emperor to resume direct control of many of the Empire’s affairs which had come to be managed by the Gozoku. Unfortunately, while no one would have dared disobey the Emperor, the structures of government continued to operated as they were rather than immediately shifting according to the Emperor’s will. Whether because of intentional undermining of the Emperor’s authority, or simple neglect and carelessness, Hantei the 16th found his orders not being obeyed even as every one of his subjects professed their loyalty to him.

Hantei the 16th proceeded to take a series of actions to break up the alliance of the Gozoku which led to him earning the nickname “the Steel Chrysanthemum”. For example, after Daidoji Tojo became the senior member of the Daidoji Trading Council, he staged a power-play within Crane lands to attack and discredit a childhood rival, which derailed plans the Emperor had been orchestrating for years. In retaliation, the Steel Chrysanthemum elevated him to the Fortune of Dung.  (Remember that we have previously discussed the power that Emperors claim have to elevate people to become fortunes.)

Hantei the 16th also used the Witch Hunters to investigate those who he suspected of conspiring against his interests. This led many overzealous Witch Hunters to go beyond what the Steel Chrysanthemum had ordered of them, with some going so far as to lie about the results of their tests, and condemn some suspects as tsukai who had never practiced maho. After the reign of Hantei the 16th ended, his successor rolled back the power of Witch Hunters as a direct response to the excesses they perpetrated while trying to best serve his father.

For example, Witch Hunters cannot directly accept expensive gifts. Having sworn a vow of poverty, they instead accept the gifts “on behalf of my office”, with the understanding that if/when they are ever reassigned, the gifts would stay with the office rather than departing with the person. This vow became a requirement of all Witch Hunters everywhere as part of the reforms which occurred after the reign of Hantei the 16th.

Iuchiban’s Resurrection:

It’s unclear exactly how Iuchiban’s soul was freed from the Forgotten Tomb, but Jama Suru is believed to have used the samurai names he acquired over 2 centuries to perform rituals to break the soul free, and Jama Kohaku constructed a new body for Iuchiban. Together, they gathered most (though not all) of his other surviving disciples and attempted to take the Empire by force. They began by raising an army of zombies and moved across the countryside. Any losses they sustained were quickly replenished with the bodies of fallen samurai. Recognizing the plight they faced, enemy daimyo quickly put aside their differences to stamp out this force before it could grow too large to stop. Iuchiban had counted on the Empire remaining too divided to oppose him, but he was once again defeated and slain.

Because the Forgotten Tomb could no longer be relied upon to contain Iuchiban’s soul, the Kaiu family constructed a new Tomb of Iuchiban. Its exact location is unknown, and it may be at the south end of the Twilight Mountains, or hidden somewhere in the Kuni Wastelands, or deep in the Shinomen Forest. Kaiu Gineza was the chief architect of this new tomb, and upon its completion he sealed himself inside, both to complete its unbreakable wardings and to prevent any possibility that his knowledge of its defenses could ever be used to break Iuchiban free. To this day Iuchiban has not escaped again, nor is any bloodspeaker currently alive believed capable of accomplishing such a feat.

After the return of Iuchiban, some of institutional powers stripped from Witch Hunters after the reign of the Steel Chrysanthemum were restored, though still nowhere near the point they were at their peak. There are currently only about 200 Witch Hunters stationed throughout the Empire, which has around 350 domains. Even a post as prestigious as the 1st Imperial Legion wouldn’t have an assigned Witch Hunter if not for the historical reasons for the Empire to be concerned about possible khadi influence on Chai Sedo.







One thing to note about what I've tried to do in my description of these events is to use the kinds of words and phrasings that people within the society would use.  For example, look at how I described Hantei the 16th.  Consider the sentence:

"This led many overzealous Witch Hunters to go beyond what the Steel Chrysanthemum had ordered of them, with some going so far as to lie about the results of their tests, and condemn some suspects as tsukai who had never practiced maho."

If we read that kind of thing in a history book about a real-life premodern society, we would probably conclude that the Emperor really did order the Witch Hunters to lie and falsely condemn his political opponents as tsukai so that they could be executed, which would help re-establish the Emperor's authority and strength.  And indeed, that kind of thing is my intended interpretation - anyone who reads that is supposed to think that Hantei the 16th was a complicated figure who brutally opposed his enemies, and even if they think his goals and results were mostly just or well-intentioned, they probably wouldn't want a modern Emperor to behave as he did.

However, no one in polite society would ever say that!  Instead, they would say things like, "The Emperor always does what is appropriate for his time and place.  In the past, Emperors such as the Steel Chrysanthemum behaved in ways which were appropriate to the challenges of their era, and the Hantei dynasty of today is wise enough to understand that the current era no longer demands such actions."


