
First of all, because Rokugan is not a real place on earth and has a different cosmology, we have given it a 360 day solar year.  This avoids us needing to worry about months of different lengths or leap years or interregnum days or anything complicated like that.

Second, each month is a 30 day lunar month, and the lunar cycle is exactly 30 days, with the full moon falling in the middle of each month and the new moon happening at the beginning/end of each month.  This makes the lunar cycle easy to keep track of alongside the calendar.  It also reinforces the centrality of the sun and moon in the Rokugani cosmology.

The months of the Rokugani calendar do not exactly line up with our own.  The 1st day of the Rokugani year is the 1st day of spring, which puts it at what we would think of as the end of February.

Here are the Twelve Months of the Rokugani Year
N / Zodiac / Traditional Name of the Month / equivalent Gregorian Month
1 / Hare / Mutsuki (affection) / February
2  / Dragon / Kisaragi (changing) / March
3 / Serpent / Yayoi (new life) / April
4 / Horse / Uzuki (unohana month) / May
5 / Goat / Satsuki (sprout-planting month) / June
6 / Monkey / Minatsuki (waterless month) / July
7 / Rooster / Fumizuki (poetry month) / August
8 / Dog / Hazuki (leaf month) / September
9 / Boar / Nagatsuki (long month) / October
10 / Rat / Kaminazuki (month of the gods) / November
11 / Ox / Shimotsuki (frost month) / December
12 / Tiger / Shiwasu (priests running) / January

The months were divided into three periods of roughly 10 days each. These periods were called jun.
They were the upper jun, the middle jun, and the lower jun (joujun, chuujun, and gejun).

The last day of each month is called misoka. The last day of the year is the great misoka, or oomisoka.

The Sexagenary Cycle of 60 years names each year by a combination of one each of the Ten Heavenly Stems and the Twelve Earthly Branches. Each year is a different Earthly Branch (the familiar zodiac animals), while the Heavenly Stem only change every twelve years, after a cycle of the earthly branches.

For example, the first year is the year of the Yang Wood Rat, then the year of the Yang Wood Ox, and
so on until the Yang Wood Boar, then the Heavenly Stem changes so the next year is the year of the Yin Wood Rat, and so on.

This cycle is also used to identify the day.

Ten Heavenly Stems:
1 ko/kinoe Yang Wood
2 otsu/kinoto Yin Wood
3 hei/hinoe Yang Fire
4 tei/hinoto Yin Fire
5 bo/tsuchinoe Yang Earth
6 ki/tsuchinoto Yin Earth
7 kou/kanoe Yang Metal
8 shin/kanoto Yin Metal
9 jin/mizunoe Yang Water
10 ki/mizunoto Yin Water

Twelve Earthly Branches:
1 shi/ne Rat
2 chuu/ushi Ox
3 in/tora Tiger
4 bou/u Hare
5 shin/tatsu Dragon
6 shi/mi Snake
7 go/uma Horse
8 mi/hitsuji Sheep
9 shin/saru Monkey
10 yuu/tori Rooster
11 jutsu/inu Dog
12 gai/i Boar

12 Hours of the Day
An “hour” in the traditional Rokugani system is a twelfth of a day, or two hours. The twelve hours of the day use the Twelve Earthly Branches.
Hare 0600 - 0800
Dragon 0800 - 1000
Serpent 1000 - 1200
Horse 1200 - 1400
Goat 1400 - 1600
Monkey 1600 - 1800
Rooster 1800 - 2000
Dog 2000 - 2200
Boar 2200 - 0000
Rat 0000 - 0200
Ox 0200 - 0400
Tiger 0400 - 0600

This is all based on historical Chinese calendar that the Japanese Imperial Court adopted in the seventh century C.E. though obviously some modifications have been made.

Before diving into the calendar, it is helpful to give a “big picture” of the planting and harvest seasons
for the major crops.

The staples of Rokugan are the Five Grains: rice, wheat or barley, soybeans, sweet red azuki beans,
and millet. Of these, rice occupies the central place. Taxes are calculated mainly based on rice, money was originally backed by rice, and the domain of a daimyo is measured not in people or in land area, but in average annual rice production. Soybeans are second in importance, providing not only a valuable source of protein and vegetable fat, but also playing a vital role in rice farming as a nitrogen fixer that renews the soil of the rice fields. Azuki beans also play both roles as a nutritious food and a nitrogen fixer, but are less useful and less prominent than soybeans. Wheat, barley, and millet are sometimes raised as aftercrops, but they primarily are raised as the least worse choice for farmers who cannot grow rice because their land is too dry or their regional climate is too cold.

Besides the Five Grains, people raise many vegetables, such as daikon radish, kabu turnips, uri melons, nasu eggplants, greens, and various fruits. Cash crops like tea, tobacco, hemp, indigo, nanohana rape flowers, and others tend to be specialties of the regions suited to their cultivation.

Silk also deserves special attention. Silk is the product of weaving thread made from the cocoons of
silkworms. Silkworms exclusively eat the leaves of varieties of kuwa mulberry trees, so silk weavers must grow mulberry orchards to support the practice. In many cases, farming families farm cereal grains as well as cultivating silk. Silk production is heavily gendered, traditionally the exclusive domain of women.

Farming practices vary according to regional climate, regional rainfall, the terrain of an individual
family's fields.

Temperate regions are well mapped to the traditional calendar. In this kind of climate, farmers can
grow a single crop of rice with an aftercrop. On well-watered land (in valleys or near rivers), farmers can grow a single crop of rice followed by an aftercrop of barley, autumn wheat, or autumn soybeans. Farmers with drier land grow spring wheat followed by an aftercrop of millet or autumn soybeans.
Southern regions have shorter winters, warmer summers, and more rainfall. Options unique to warmer southern regions include double cropping rice and aftercropping summer millet and azuki beans. Double crop rice is only possible for farmers who have very well watered lands, such as river deltas. Farmers who double crop rice must alternate to replenish the land in some years by single cropping rice with an autumn soybean or azuki bean aftercrop. Most farmers in warm regions do not have enough water to double crop rice, however, so they single crop rice with an aftercrop. Southern farmers with dry land can grow spring wheat with an aftercrop of summer millet, autumn soybeans, or azuki beans.

Cold and dry regions in the north cannot reliably grow rice or autumn soybeans because of the likelihood of late frost and drought. Cold regions also have fewer options for aftercrops, since azuki beans and autumn soybeans cannot mature before freezing weather begins. Cold region farmers grow crops with shorter growing seasons and less need for water, namely winter wheat, spring barley, millet, and summer soybeans. One common rotation is spring barley or summer soybeans with an aftercrop of winter wheat.

As I explained before, the Rokugani solar year is 360 days, with 30-day lunar cycles. We have set the calendar in this way to allow for consistent, predictable lunar months, without the hassle of intercalation. This also means that the zodiacal cycle of 12 days is predictable, with the first day of the year falling on a Day of the Rat, the last day of the year falling on a Day of the Boar, and every other day similarly fixed the same each year.

The Rokugani calendar is divided into twelve lunar months of 30 days each. The month begins with the new moon, and the full moon occurs on the 15th day of each month. Each month has a seasonal or
agricultural connotation fixed to the climate and ritual holidays of that month. In addition, each month is also aligned to a zodiacal sign. The Rokugani year begins in the spring. In Rokugan, the seasons are
centered on the equinoxes and solstices, rather than beginning and ending on the equinoxes and solstices – for example, the Vernal Equinox occurs in the middle of the second month of spring, instead of at the beginning of spring. This means that the Rokugani spring begins in a cold and potentially snowy time of year.

The most important festival days tend to occur on the 15th days of months and on “double odd” days,
such as the first day of the first month, the third day of the third month, and so on. Each month also brings its seasonal flowers and colors. This manifests itself in many ways, especially in poetry, clothing, and decorations.







Here's a breakdown of the 1st month of the Rokugani calendar.  This description lists the real-world calendar days which are roughly equivalent to the days on the Rokugani calendar, to help the reader account for the fact that the 1st day of the Rokugani year is the first day of spring, which represents a considerable offset from our own calendar.

1st Month: Mutsuki (“affection month”), Month of the Hare
4 February – 5 March
Seasonal color: Red blossom plum combination (crimson and purple)
Flowers of Spring: tsubaki camelia, aomugi green barley, sumire violets, harunokusa spring grasses and herbs, tanpopo dandelions, seri dropwort, yomogi mugwort, wakame seaweed
Flowers of Mutsuki: ume plum, kobai red plum, shitamoe and kusanome sprouting grass and flowers, Norine seaweed

The first month is called the “month of affection” or “friendly month” because of the tradition of paying respects to one's superiors and gathering with friends and family during the New Year's holidays. The New Year's festival of Oshogatsu (“first month”) fills the first fifteen days of the first month. It's considered unlucky to cook during Oshogatsu (there is a taboo on the kitchen), so people eat a variety of special foods prepared in the previous month, such as rice cakes, roasted chestnuts, dried fish, and pickles beyond count.

Many of the “firsts” of the year are special – the first visit to a shrine, the first snow, the first flowers, the first martial arts practice, and so on. Typically, people participate as a group, in varying degrees of formality, to do their “firsts” together.

1st Day (4 Feb): Risshun (first day of spring)
In the solar calendar, Risshun marks the first day of spring.

The first day of the year begins with rituals and ends with a festival. The Emperor and daimyo begin the day with the ceremony of Shihohai (Prayer to the Four Directions), and nobles and vassals participate in Kochohai (Lesser Obeisance), paying respects to their lords and masters.

On the night of Risshun, people gather outside to enjoy parades, fireworks, music, and hot sweet sake.

The Emperor and daimyo also partake of the Okusuri and Hagatame (Medicine Offerings and Tooth Hardening) ceremonies for the first three days of the year, drinking wine spiced with special herbs and eating yang foods such as radishes, mirror-shaped rice cakes, and melon, to fortify their health for the year.

Risshun is also the day when all Rokugani count themselves one year older. Significant ages such as adulthood (genpaku), 60, and 80 are celebrated on this day.

5th Day: Joui (Bestowal of ranks)
On the fifth day, new ranks are bestowed to those who have been promoted. Nobles gather in the Imperial Court, vassals gather in the castles of their daimyo, and clerks gather in the parlors of merchant families. After new ranks are bestowed, the gatherings pass a cup of wine to toast their congratulations.

For samurai and nobles, a new rank may mean new living quarters, new clothing, and other coveted benefits.

For farmers, laborers, and eta, this is a day to pay one's respects to one's new superiors with effusive congratulations and gifts.

7th Day (10 Feb): Wakana no sekku or Nanakusa no sekku (Festival of Young Herbs)

Nanakusa no sekku is one of the five Gosechi holidays.

On the seventh day, people gather the seven auspicious herbs (seri water dropwort, nazuna shepherd's purse, gogyo cudweed, hakobera chickweed, hotokenoza nipplewort, suzuna turnip, and suzushiro daikon radish) and prepare them in a special soup with stewed rice cakes. These herbs are wild edible herbs of early spring, and they may be the first fresh vegetables eaten after a long winter of pickles and dried fruit.

In the Imperial Court and the castles of daimyo, this day includes a special excursion to pick the seven herbs. Peasant villages are also likely to pick the herbs. Townspeople may have to pick the herbs ahead of time, or buy them in shops.

The Imperial Court also celebrates the Aouma no Sekki (Ceremony of Blue Horses) on this day, with a parade of auspicious “blue” gray horses from the Imperial stables. Horses are yang animals, and blue horses are especially yang. This promotes good health and good fortune for the coming year.
Pine decorations are placed in households. In some homes, a pine tree is erected in the courtyard or in front of the house. The pine is auspicious and yang because it is an evergreen.

15th Day: Mochigayu (Full Moon Porridge)
The fifteenth day is the first full moon of the New Year, and the last day of Oshogatsu (New Year's). Rice porridge is prepared and stirred with sticks of peeled elder wood. Women who hope to conceive a male child this year are struck on the loins with the stick after it is used to stir the gruel.

After eating the porridge, families burn their New Year's decorations (the pine tree, paper money, paper flowers, paper horses, etc.). The kami who spent New Year's in the home rise with the smoke to return to the mountains and fields.

16th Day (19 Feb): Usui (rainwater)
In the solar calendar, Usui marks the time when the climate is warming, and it is more likely to rain than to snow.

The Imperial Court also holds Tooka no Sechie (The Festival of Poetry Dances) on the sixteenth day. Nobles recite poetry in honor of the spring, perhaps incorporating inside jokes from the events of the recent Oshogatsu. After the poetry, elaborate court dances are held.

Exceptionally wealthy merchants and particularly decadent daimyo might ape the court celebration of the Poetry Dances, but most ordinary people will mark this day with nothing more than an impromptu poem or song.

18th Day: Noriyumi (Bowman's Wager)
On the eighteenth day, the Imperial Palace holds an archery competition between the Inner Palace Guards and the Outer Palace Guards. The losing side drinks the cup of defeat, and the occasion is topped off with a banquet. This occasion may be proper or decadent depending on the virtue of the Imperial Court and the discipline of the guards.  The Bowman's Wager competition is also held in other contexts - it was recently used to decide some important matters in the peace treaty negotions between the Lion and Crane as they negotiated the end of the Lion/Crane war, and local cities often hold Bowman's Wager competitions to test the skill of their own archers.

30th Day (5 Mar): Keichitsu (insects awaken)
In the solar calendar, Keichitsu (insects awaken) marks the time when it is warm enough that hibernating insects have begun to emerge from the earth and trees.

2nd Month: Kisaragi (“changing”), Month of the Dragon
6 March – 4 April
Seasonal color: Peach combination (peach and khaki)
Flowers of Spring: tsubaki camelia, aomugi green barley, sumire violets, harunokusa spring grasses and herbs, tanpopo dandelions, seri dropwort, yomogi mugwort, wakame seaweed
Flowers of Kisaragi: sakura early cherry blossoms, konome tree buds, ryuujo willow fluff, tsukushi horsetail, warabi fiddlehead fern, shunran spring orchid, tsubana reed ears, mukusa waterweeds, ashinotsuno reed sprouts

The second month is called the “month of changing” because nature is changing into the bright colors of new leaves and flowers, and people are changing into lighter clothes.

4th Day: Kinensai (Spring Prayers)
On the fourth day of the second month, the governmental Ministries of Rites hold rituals and prayers to call the Rice God down from the hills and pray for good crops. Farmers hold similar rituals.

11th Day: Rekken (Examinations)
On the eleventh day of the second month, at the Imperial Court, nobles selected for promotion from the Sixth Rank wear garlands of flowers and proceed to be formally examined by the top ministers of the government. Their names are entered into the rolls of officials of the Fifth Rank, and they join their new ministers for the three-by-three exchange of wine cups.

12th Day (18 Mar): Haru Higan (Haru Higan festival)
The twelfth day of the second month marks the beginning of the Haru Higan festival, a seven-day Shinseist festival centered on the Vernal Equinox. Families visit the graves of their ancestors, weed and clean the graves, and make offerings of flowers, incense, and rice balls. During this time, monks chant the canon of Shinseist sutras, and services are held every day at temples. Many people attend midday temple services every day during Haru Higan.

15th Day (20 Mar): Shunbun (Vernal Equinox)
The fifteenth day of the second month is Shunbun, the Vernal Equinox, the halfway point of Spring.

18th Day: End of Haru Higan
The eighteenth day of the second month is the last day of the Haru Higan spring festival. Even if daily temple services are inconvenient, almost everybody attends a temple service on this final day of the festival.

3rd Month: Yayoi (“new life”), Month of the Serpent
5 April – 5 May
Seasonal color: Cherry combination (white and burgundy)
Flowers of Spring: tsubaki camelia, aomugi green barley, sumire violets, harunokusa spring grasses and herbs, tanpopo dandelions, seri dropwort, yomogi mugwort, wakame seaweed
Flowers of Yayoi: sakura cherry, tsutsuji azalea, fuji wisteria, yamabuki mountain rose, momo peach, wakamidori young green plants, kuwa mulberry, yanagi willow, takenoaki “bamboo autumn,” nanohana rape flowers, daikon radish, mame beans, genge vetch, sakurasoo primrose, shibazakura phlox

The third month is called “Yayoi” because of the profusion of flowers and new growth in the natural world. The star of Yayoi is the sakura, or cherry, which blooms for a brief two weeks before falling away. Hanami flower-viewing parties to see the cherry blossoms and the other beauties of Yayoi are near-universal. Clothing invariably incorporates the white and red colors of the cherries.
Yayoi is also when farmers begin to plant rice in single-cropping regions of Rokugan. This is also the month to plant spring wheat and summer soybeans. (Summer soybeans are preferred in both southern and northern climates; they are a short season crop with a long flowering period.)
In contrast to the many blooming flowers, Yayoi is the time of “bamboo autumn,” when most species of bamboo shed their leaves. The bamboo leaves turn yellow, and fall in the next month, before growing back anew.

1st Day (5 Apr): Seimei (clear and bright)
In the solar calendar, seimei marks a period of spring when the weather is usually sunny and cloudless.

3rd Day (7 Apr): Hinamatsuri (Doll Festival) or Momo no sekku (Peach Festival), and Gotou (Holy Light)
Momo no sekku, or Hinamatsuri, is one of the five Gosechi holidays. It is called the Peach Festival because the peach blossoms are in bloom, but it is more commonly known as the Doll Festival because of the use of dolls for ritual purification. The Holy Light observance centers around lighting candles.
On the third day of the third month, people use straw dolls for ritual purification ceremonies. The dolls are ritually linked to the person through writing the person's name, birthdate, and guardian star on the doll, and rituals are performs to transfer evil spirits and impurities to the doll. The dolls are thrown into rivers and oceans to carry away the bad fortune.
In a more modern custom, families with daughters make a decorative display of dolls in their home to bring good fortune for their daughters. The characteristics and positioning of the dolls is rigidly prescribed, but dolls can be simple or very ornate. Wealthy families have lavishly appointed displays of dolls.
Momo no sekku is an auspicious time for medicine hunts (kusagari), expeditions to search for special herbs and minerals that promote longevity and good health. Mugwort is a particularly important herb, since it can be burned to dispel evil spirits. Medicine hunts are mainly done by servants (on behalf of their masters), doctors, apothecaries, shugenja, diviners, tsukai, and Bloodspeakers.
Momo no sekku is also important for the silk industry, because it is the time when women begin feeding mulberry leaves to newly hatched silkwork larvae.
That night, the Emperor lights a candle and prays to the North Star for protection. Ordinary people join in the lighting of candles, and men and women dance together. Music, dancing, and sake are typical. In ancient times, Gotou festivals devolved into orgies.
The Hinamatsuri and Gotou are a particularly important time for maho. Tsukai and Bloodspeakers use the purification ceremony to help control the onset of the Shadowlands Taint. They also use corrupted versions of the purification ceremonies for some maho rituals. Bloodspeakers gain special power over a person if they can acquire the straw doll used for the day's purification ceremony.

13th Day (17 Apr): Haru no douyou (preparing the ground for spring)
The thirteenth day of the third month is haru no douyou, marking them time when farmers must begin plant rice.

16th Day (20 Apr): Kokuu (grain rain)
In the solar calendar, kokuu marks the waning of spring and the time when farmers need rain to nourish the rice that they have planted this month.

28th Day (2 May): Hachijuuhachiya (88 nights since spring)
Hachijuuhachiya marks the time when new planted rice is safe from even the most freakish spring frost.

That takes us to the end of spring.







I will describe the summer months next:

4th Month: Uzuki (“unohana” or “deutzia”), Month of the Horse
6 May – 5 June
Seasonal color: Orange flower combination (deadleaf yellow and purple)
Flowers of Summer: aogiri phoenix tree, natsukusa summer grasses and herbs, aoashi green reeds, mugura burweed, makomo water oats, ukikusa duckweed
Flowers of Uzuki: botan peony, wakakaede young maple leaves, tokiwagi ochiba fallen evergreen leaves, unohana deutzia flower, ibara multiflora rose, kiri pawlonia, takeochiba fallen bamboo leaves, yuri lily, takenoko bamboo shoots, fuki buterburr, mugi barley

The fourth month is called the “unohana month” for the unohana flower, or deutzia, that blooms seasonally. Summer begins in the fourth month.
Uzuki is an even-numbered month when people are busy with farming, so it has a relatively clear calendar. However, there are many flowers and plants to enjoy in this month, and people acutely aware of the approaching rainy season will make time to enjoy nature.
Uzuki is also the month for harvesting winter wheat and picking tea leaves, and the time for harvesting winter barley in temperate areas.

1st Day: Rikka (first day of summer)
In the solar calendar, Rikka is the first day of summer.
The first day of the fourth month marks the beginning of summer. People change to single-layer kimono and put aside the flowers and colors of spring.

7th Day: Aoi Matsuri (Hollyhock Festival)
The seventh day of the fourth month is the Hollyhock Festival, which includes displays of horseback archery (yabusame) and the ritual appointment and procession of the chief priestess of an important shrine.

17th Day: Shouman (grain full)
In the solar calendar, shouman marks a time when barleycorns should be full and plump.


5th Month: Satsuki (“sprout”), Month of the Goat
6 June – 6 July
Seasonal color: Artemisia combination (sprout green and yellow)
Flowers of Summer: aogiri phoenix tree, natsukusa summer grasses and herbs, aoashi green reeds, mugura burweed, makomo water oats, ukikusa duckweed
Flowers of Satsuki: tachibana mandarin orange, aoume green plum fruits, kakitsubata blue flag iris, ayame wild iris, shaobu Japanese iris, sanae young rice plants

Satsuki, the “sprout month,” is the time when new rice plants begin to sprout. It is also the beginning of the rainy season, when torrential rains fill rice paddies and overflood riverbanks. The significant Iris Festival is held in this month.
In the latter half of the month, women begin harvesting silk cocoons. After harvesting, women will gather in workshops or family groups to boil the cocoons and spin them into thread. In the cottage industry, weaving is done mainly in the winter, but in shops and in more ambitious families, weaving is done year round, sometimes even through the night.
Satsuki is also the time for harvesting winter barley in the northernmost areas of Rokugan, and the beginning of harvest for the early rice crop in double cropping areas in years with good weather.

1st Day (6 Jun): Houshu (grain in ear)
In the solar calendar, Houshu marks the time when wheat and barley should be in ear.

5th Day (10 Jun): Ayame no sekku (Iris Festival)
Ayame no sekku is one of the five Gosechi festivals.
The fifth day of the fifth month is the Iris Festival. On this day, yin energy empowers vicious evil spirits to roam the land and harm the people. The Iris Festival was created to combat these spirits with yang events of horse racing and archery competitions. People also wear amulets woven from five colors of silk threads in special ritual patterns to ward off evil influences and promote good yang energies. At the close of the festival, palace guards, samurai, and priests twang bowstrings to frighten away evil spirits. Purification rituals using scapegoat dolls, like the ritual performed on the Doll Festival, are also performed during the Iris Festival, but they are not as central to the day's events. Medicine hunts for mugwort and other beneficial herbs are also common during the Iris Festival.
The Iris Festival is named for the various iris flowers seasonal to this time. Irises are used in decorations, herbal sake, and pillows, and in particular, people wear iris garlands in their hair. The Imperial Court holds iris contests, in which the court ladies enter pairs of iris roots, with accompanying poems, to be judged for beauty, style, and uniqueness. The ladies and their attendants may spend days in advance searching for fine specimens of lotus root for the contest.
The Iris Festival is also the first day when women begin gathering silk cocoons for making silk.
For tsukai and Bloodspeakers, the Iris Festival is a powerful time for summoning oni and raising the spirits of the dead.

6th Day (11 Jun): Nyuubai (beginning of rainy season)
The sixth day of the fifth month traditionally begins the rainy season. Most people carry umbrellas and straw capes for the next month to fend off frequent, sudden, torrential rainstorms.

10th Day: Shinkou (Imperial Alms)
From the tenth to the thirtieth day of the fifth month, the Emperor and daimyo distribute alms of rice and salt throughout the land. This practice is restrained in years of plenty, and more liberal in years of famine or other trouble.

16th Day (21 Jun): Geshi (Summer Solstice)
In the solar calendar, the fifteenth day of the fifth month is the Summer Solstice, the longest day of the year.

26th Day (2 Jul): Hangesho (5-day break from farming)
On the twenty-sixth day of the fifth month, farmers in many regions observe Hangesho, a five-day break from the backbreaking work of farming.


6th Month: Minazuki (“dry”), Month of the Monkey
7 July – 7 August
Seasonal color: Lily combination (red and deadleaf yellow)
Flowers of Summer: aogiri phoenix tree, natsukusa summer grasses and herbs, aoashi green reeds, mugura burweed, makomo water oats, ukikusa duckweed
Flowers of Minazuki: himawari sunflower, nadeshiko pinks, yuugao moonflowers, uri melon, nasu eggplant, hasu lotus, kusaikire rank-smelling weeds

Minazuki, the “dry month,” brings the end of the rainy season and the beginning of summer heat.
Late Minazuki is the beginning of the harvests for spring wheat and summer soybeans. In temperate areas, farmers begin to plant autumn soybeans in Minazuki or as late as next month. (Autumn soybeans are a longer season crop preferred in temperate climates; they have a short flowering season and they tend to grow as vines.) Minazuki is also the time for harvesting early rice in double cropping areas, in good weather years.

1st Day (7 Jul): Shousho (lesser heat)
In the solar calendar, Shoushou is the beginning of summer heat.

14th Day (20 Jul):    Natsu no douyou (preparing the ground for summer)
On the fourteenth day of the sixth month, it is traditional to eat eel.

17th Day (23 Jul): Taisho (greater heat)
In the solar calendar, Taisho is the time of the hottest days of summer.

30th Day: Setsubun and Oharae (great purification)
The thirtieth day of the sixth month is Setsubun, the eve before the beginning of Autumn. The Autumn Setsubun is not as festive as the Spring Setsubun at year's end. However, it is still considered a significant turning point for the year, used as a day of reckoning when debts are settled and obligations are discharged. In some domains, stipends are paid on Setsubun, and many contracts stipulate payment by Setsubun.
This day of reckoning is also a day of atonement, when the Emperor performs the sacred and ancient ceremony of Oharae, the Great Purification. The Oharae rituals echo the Heavenly Grotto myth, in which Amaterasu secluded herself in a grotto and emerged after being coaxed and worshipped by the heavenly hosts. The rituals include use of sacred regalia bestowed by the kami (mirrors, swords, jewels, and silk scarves), and powerful magic such as spirit-calling (shoukon) and spirit-shaking (tamafuri). The Oharae cleanses major sins committed in the past year, such as taboo defilements of sacred spaces, croplands, and relationships.
In ancient times, the Oharae may have included human sacrifices. Some tsukai and Bloodspeakers perform human sacrifices and rites of defilement on this day, such as flaying piebald horses in the reverse direction, to weaken kami and call oni.







Here are the Autumn months:

7th Month: Fumizuki (“poetry”), Month of the Rooster
8 August – 7 September
Seasonal color: Cicada wing combination (cedar bark and sky blue)
Flowers of Autumn: nashi pear, konomi nuts and seeds, tsuta ivy, bashoo inedible banana, keitoo cockscomb, kiku chrysanthemums, imo yam, ine mature rice plants, kusanohana flowering grasses, susuki pampas grass
Flowers of Fumizuki: mukuge rose of sharon, momo peach fruit, kiri hitoha falling pawlonia leaves, asagao morning glories, hagi bush clover, kuzu kudzu, kikyoo bellflower, ominaeshi yellow valerian, akanomanma knotgrass, fujibakama “purple trousers” boneset

Fumizuki, the “poetry month” or “month of literature,” is the first month of autumn. It is a bountiful time of flowers and vegetables. It also brings two sacred holidays, the the Tanabata Star Festival and the Obon Festival.
Summer soybeans may be harvested as late as early Fumizuki; autumn soybeans are planted no later than early Fumizuki.

1st Day (7 Aug): Risshuu (first day of autumn)
In the solar calendar, Risshuu is the first day of autumn.

7th Day (14 Aug): Tanabata (Star Festival)
Tanabata is one of the five Gosechi holidays.
The seventh day of the seventh month is Tanabata, the Star Festival. On the night of Tanabata, people gather outside to gaze at the stars, particularly Vega and Altair. Merriment is made with poetry, music, and dance. In the Imperial Court, the Magpie Dance is performed.
The legend of Tanabata celebrates the meeting of two lovers, the Heavenly Weaver Maiden and the Heavenly Cowherd (the two stars). The two neglected their duties to enjoy each other's company, and as punishment, the kami separated them on either side of the Heavenly River. They are permitted to meet once each year on the night of Tanabata, assisted by magpies that flock together to form a flying bridge.
In ancient times, the cowherd and maiden manifested as sacrifices of oxen and maidens. Some tsukai and Bloodspeakers perpetuate this practice.
In some regions, peasant weaver women place fruits in front of their homes and pray for skill in weaving, and that night they set out an umbrella pierced with seven holes, laced with five colored threads. If in the morning a spider has woven a web between the threads, it portends success in weaving for the year to come.

15th Day: Obon (Bon Festival)
The fifteenth day of the seventh month is the Obon Festival, when families invite back the spirits of their ancestors to return to them for one day and one night. This is a time of reunification for ancestors whose souls were in Yomi or Tokoyo; for souls damned in hell, it is a brief reprieve. The gates of the underworld are opened by the power of monks, who chant the sutras of the Shinseist canon for the entire week leading up to Obon.
Offerings of round food (rice balls, oranges, etc.) are placed in homes and temples for the dead. Hempen stems and candles are burned next to mortuary tablets to guide the spirits home. On the night of Obon, the people gather outside wearing white masks and dance under paper lanterns and fireworks. 

16th Day (23 Aug): Shosho (end of heat)
In the solar calendar, Shosho is the end of the heat of summer.

25th Day (1 Sep): Nihyakujunichi (210 days since Spring)
The twenty-fifth day of the seventh month is the 210th day since Spring. Around this time of the year, rice plants are flowering, a delicate and important stage of their growth. They are highly prone to wind damage. Unfortunately, this is also typhoon season in some regions. Music, dances, and prayers are held to forestall typhoons and protect the rice.

30th Day: Sumo Wrestling
On the thirtieth day of the seventh month, sumo wrestling matches are held to protect the rice harvest and honor the rice god.


8th Month: Hazuki (“leaf”), Month of the Dog
8 September – 7 October
Seasonal color: Aster combination (lavender and burgundy)
Flowers of Autumn: nashi pear, konomi nuts and seeds, tsuta ivy, bashoo inedible banana, keitoo cockscomb, kiku chrysanthemums, imo yam, ine mature rice plants, kusanohana flowering grasses, susuki pampas grass
Flowers of Hazuki: yanagi chiru falling willow leaves, ran orchid, wase early rice

Hazuki, the “leaf month,” is the last month before the harvest. It includes the seven-day Shinseist autumn festival, the Autumnal Equinox, and the best night of the year for moon viewing.
Hazuki is also the month for harvesting millet.

1st Day (7 Sep): Hakuro (white dew)
In the solar calendar, Hakuro marks the time when dew condenses on grass and leaves in the early morning chill. It is a cliché of autumn that people who walk in the early morning, such as a lover returning home from a secret tryst, get their clothes covered in dew.

4th Day (11 Sep): Nihyakuhatsuka (220 days since Spring)
The fifth day of the eighth month is the 220th day since Spring, another important milestone approaching the rice harvest.

12th Day: Aki higan (7-day Autumn Festival)
On the twelfth day of the eighth month, Aki Higan, a seven-day Shinseist autumn festival, begins. Like Haru Higan, monks chant the sutras of the Shinseist canon through the seven days, people commonly attend temple services daily at midday, and people visit the graves of their ancestors to clean the gravesite, make offerings, and pay their respects.

15th Day (23 Sep): Shuubun (Autumnal Equinox), Hojoe (The Great Liberation), and Kangetsu (Moon Viewing)
In the solar calendar, Shuubun is the Autumnal Equinox.
On the fifteenth day of the eighth month, the Hojoe, or Great Liberation, is held at shrines throughout the land. Birds, fish, turtles, and other animals are released into appropriate places in the wild. This is done to respect the Shinseist injunction against captivity or killing of sentient beings.
The fifteenth day of the eighth month is also famous for moon viewing, since the autumn moon is considered to be the most beautiful, and since the autumn nights are likely to have clear weather. It is almost universal for people to go out at night with friends to gaze at the moon, compose poems, and enjoy food and wine. It is traditional to offer dumplings and roasted yams to the moon on this night.


9th Month: Nagatsuki (“long”), Month of the Boar
8 October – 6 November
Seasonal color: Bush clover combination (rose and slate blue)
Flowers of Autumn: nashi pear, konomi nuts and seeds, tsuta ivy, bashoo inedible banana, keitoo cockscomb, kiku chrysanthemums, imo yam, ine mature rice plants, kusanohana flowering grasses, susuki pampas grass
Flowers of Nagatsuki: kaki persimmon, ringo apple, kuri chestnuts, yuzu citron, momoji red momiji maple leaves, kaede red maple leaves, kinoko mushrooms

Nagatsuki, the “long month,” is named because the rice has grown long. This is the month of the harvest. Rice farmers work their hardest to complete the tasks of reaping, threshing, and drying the year's single crop rice and the late rice of double cropping regions.
In southern areas that single crop rice, after the rice crop, farmers plant winter wheat.
Nagatsuki is also a month of fantastic natural beauty, when many trees, especially maple, show beautiful fall colors. There is no special holiday to view the fall leaves, but it is virtually universal for friends to join for improptu trips to go leaf viewing, with the usual merriments of wine, poetry, and music. Of course, for rice farmers, there will be no time to set aside for leaf viewing in this harvest month.
The Chrysanthemum Festival – the last of the five Gosechi holidays - is celebrated in the ninth month.

1st Day (8 Oct): Kanro (cold dew)
In the solar calendar, Kanro marks the last section of the year before farmers can expect frost. Farmers must harvest their crops in the next fourteen days, or risk losing them to frost.

7th Day: Fukandenden no Sou (Presentation of the Report on Unfit Lands)
On the seventh day of the ninth month, Ministers of Revenue present reports to their Governors and daimyo on land that has fallen into disuse or that has suffered crop failures. This report may be used to help determine tax exemptions.







Here is a description of the Winter months:

9th Day (16 Oct): Choyo no sekku (Chrysanthemum Festival)
The Chrysanthemum Festival is the last of the five Gosechi holidays.
The ninth day of the ninth month is Choyo no sekku, the Chrysanthemum Festival. Gardens, temples, shrines, and fine homes display fine specimens of the seasonal flowers, including unusual “doll chrysanthemums” grown in the shape of a human figure doll. People drink wine steeped with chrysanthemum petals on this day, to promote longevity and good health.
The Imperial Court also holds an inspection of chrysanthemums, followed by court dances and a banquet featuring chrysanthemum infused wine and dishes of white trout.

13th Day (20 Oct): Aki no douyou (preparing the ground for autumn)

16th Day (23 Oct): Soukou (frost descends)
In the solar calendar, Soukou marks the time of the year when night temperatures dip below freezing and farmers can expect frost. Delaying harvest past this point risks crop loss.


10th Month: Kaminazuki (“no gods”), Month of the Rat
7 November – 6 December
Seasonal color: Maple combination (vermillion and gray-green)
Flowers of Winter: senryoo hermit smartweed berries, manryoo spearflower berries, nanten nandin berries, ochiba fallen leaves, kangiku cold mums, karehasu withered lotus, fuyuna winter greens, daikon radish, negi onion, kabu turnip, fuyukusa winter grasses, yabukooji spearflower berries
Flowers of Kaminazuki: sazanka sasanqua, chanohana tea flowers

The tenth month is the first month of winter. Many vegetables and greens become ready in winter, but for the most part, flowers and foliage wither and fall, and the only colors to be seen in nature will be red berries and white snow. However, this is the month to harvest autumn soybeans, which tend to be planted in temperate regions in central Rokugan.
The tenth month is called Kaminazuki, the “month without gods,” because the kami gather at the greatest shrine in the land in this month.

1st Day (7 Nov): Rittou (first day of winter)
In the solar calendar, Rittou is the first day of winter. This time of the year may be the last chance to travel. Merchants, granaries, and remote villages evaluate their stores and acquire and supplies that will be needed to make it through the winter.

6th Day: Gencho (Day of the Boar)
The first Day of the Boar in the tenth month is Gencho. On this day, at the Hour of the Boar, seven special rice cakes are eaten for good fortune and good health. The rice cakes, called inoko mochi (piglet rice cakes), are egg shaped, like piglets. The seven cakes are variously filled or topped with soybeans, sweet red beans, cowpeas, ground sesame, chestnuts, persimmons, and sugar.
The Emperor and daimyo present the ladies of their courts with boxes of glutinous rice (the kind used to make rice cakes) as a special gift.

16th Day (22 Nov): Shousetsu (lesser snow)
In the solar calendar, Shousetsu marks the time when at least light snow is expected. In some areas, such as northern lands and mountain domains, roads will soon become impassable until spring. Most daimyo who will hold a Winter Court will invite their guests to arrive no later than Shousetsu.


11th Month: Shimotsuki (“frost”), Month of the Ox
7 December – 4 January
Seasonal color: Chrysanthemum combination (lavender and deep blue)
Flowers of Winter: senryoo hermit smartweed berries, manryoo spearflower berries, nanten nandin berries, ochiba fallen leaves, kangiku cold mums, karehasu withered lotus, fuyuna winter greens, daikon radish, negi onion, kabu turnip, fuyukusa winter grasses, yabukooji spearflower berries
Flowers of Shimotsuki: None

The eleventh month, Shimotsuki (“frost month”), is the time when snow falls heavily (except in the south). The Festival of the First Fruits and the Gosechi Dances are held in honor of the gods for the harvest, and the rice from this year's harvest may be eaten for the first time.
Many places become snowbound in the eleventh month. Farmers often take odd jobs to supplement their income, such as by taking jobs in towns, mining, working in forges, or making shoes, umbrellas, rope, and other goods.

1st Day (7 Dec): Taisetsu (great snow)
In the solar calendar, Taisetsu marks the time when major snowfall can occur.

4th Day: Niinamesai (Festival of the First Fruits)
Niinamesai is an ancient and sacred ceremony held to give thanks to the kami for the rice harvest. The Emperor offers rice and sacred sake to the gods, particularly Amaterasu. Newly harvested rice is not eaten until Niinamesai.

5th Day: Gosechi no Mai (Gosechi Dances)
On the fifth day of the eleventh month, following the Niinamesai, the Imperial Court holds the Gosechi Dances. 

16th Day (22 Dec): Touji (Winter Solstice)
In the solar calendar, Touji is the Winter Solstice. The solar year begins and ends with this event. The New Year is reckoned as the second new moon after Touji.
It is traditional on the eve of Touji to eat squash and bathe in citron infused water.


12th Month: Shiwasu (“priests running”), Month of the Tiger
5 January – 3 February
Seasonal color: Pine combination (sprout green and deep purple)
Flowers of Winter: senryoo hermit smartweed berries, manryoo spearflower berries, nanten nandin berries, ochiba fallen leaves, kangiku cold mums, karehasu withered lotus, fuyuna winter greens, daikon radish, negi onion, kabu turnip, fuyukusa winter grasses, yabukooji spearflower berries
Flowers of Shiwasu: soobai early plum blossoms, kantsubaki winter camelia, suisen narcissus

The twelfth month, Shiwasu (“priests running”), is named for the flurry of activity by the priests of temples and shrines. Special services are held to prepare for the New Year, and significant activity is needed just to prepare temples and shrines for the crowds who will come for the Setsubun observances and next year's Oshogatsu (New Year's) observances.

1st Day (5 Jan): Shoukan (lesser cold)
13th Day: Fuyu no douyou (preparing the ground for winter)
16th Day: Daikan (greater cold)
30th Day: Setsubun (New Year's Eve)

