
One of my previous campaigns dealt with gaijin a lot, and one challenge that I faced is that Rokugan has a well-defined cosmology, which is partially based on some Chinese and Japanese religions, but if I want to incorporate other mythologies, then they are extremely likely to conflict with our existing established principles.  And not just in some of the ways we've discussed, where a single point of difference can form an interesting mystery, but in terms of totally contradicting the entire worldview.

For example, I would never introduce a gaijin nation which practiced some fantasy version of Christianity into my setting, because the cosmology of Christianity is fundamentally incompatible with what we've established for Rokugan.

Some other polytheistic practices could be adapted to work for this setting.  For example, the religion of the Roman Empire wouldn't totally fit with what we've established, but it could be adapted and changed into a fantasy version without fundamentally throwing the whole thing out.  For example, some of their gods could be their names for the Fortunes, and individual pieces of their mythology which directly contradict established doctrine could simply be dismissed as the foolish ignorance of uneducated gaijin.  And there are interesting ideas to be had - the Legionnaire's Oath we discussed earlier is inspired by the Roman legionnaire's oath from actual historical records.

In my previous campaign I tried to take on this challenge.  The Moto were trying to rally "the northern tribes" under their banner.  While some claimed that this constituted a gaijin army, others pointed out that if properly done these northerners would stop being gaijin after they swore fealty to the Moto and began paying Imperial taxes.  The northern tribe called the "Uru" rebelled against the Moto, which led to Gaheris conducting an extensive military campaign against them.

Ide diplomats had previously spread some proper religious doctrine to the Uru, such that the Uru already recognized the divinity of the Hantei. However, the particulars seem to have gotten somewhat lost in translation.  Here are some things which the PCs in the previous campaign learned about the Uru religion:

→ Lord Moon and Lady Sun are known as “those who came before”. They gave birth to the “gen”, who are the elemental kami of Air, Earth, Fire, and Water.

→ The elemental kami themselves gave birth to the plants and animals of the world, as well as to “all the races of humans and other creatures”.

→ “Those who came before” also gave birth to the Hantei, who is the youngest and most favored of their children. As the golden child of the sun and moon, he has dominion over all of the gen. “Sahir” (the Salaam word for shugenja which is apparently also the Uru word for shugenja) have a lesser control and can only call upon local gen to do their bidding. “Hantei neez Onder ilg Onder ilg Onder” – Karluk says that Hantei is the khan of khan of khans.

→ The Uru recognize many of the fortunes, all of them by different names.

→ The Uru have no knowledge of the Five Elemental Dragons who are the incarnate divinities of the elements. They do recognize gods of the 4 material elements, but don’t understand that they are dragons, and also do not understand how they are different from the fortunes.

→ The gen (elemental kami) gave birth to horses long after the human race. The first horses were seen as ugly demons, but a human named Uru was unafraid of them and recognized them as beautiful angels. He befriended the first horses and learned to ride them, which is why the Uru are the first and greatest riders of horses among all the peoples of the world. The word “Uru” literally means “horse rider”.

It's challenging to adapt different religious traditions into the same setting, but I tried to do some combination of embracing a certain level of ambiguity, while also offering a framework by which these conflicting religious traditions can be understood.  Obviously their account of how different parts of the world was created is different from what we have established in Rokugan's history of the world, but there shouldn't be any irreconcilable differences in the cosmology of the Uru people as compared to the cosmology of Rokugan.

One of the PCs in that campaign asked the Uru what they know of the Moto.  Here's a bit of background about the Moto and the Unicorn clan which is relevant to this question.

Many sloppy histories record the Unicorn clan as “leaving” Rokugan ~100 years after the Empire was founded, and “returning” about 200 years ago, thus being “gone” for about 800 years.

This is a gross oversimplification, though many plays and "pillow books" take liberties with the actual history in order to create more dramatic scenes of the Unicorn clan being completely absent from their lands prior to returning all at once.

What is true is that the Unicorn clan shifted the bulk of its forces considerably to the west and Shinjo’s children conquored the city of Medinat al Salaam, renaming it to Medin al Salaat. Some early historians have suggested that this was a mistake on the part of the largely illiterate early Unicorn clan, though its unclear what led them to this conclusion.

Regardless, ruling this city state and reaping the benefits were far better than overseeing the largely meager farmland of most of Unicorn lands. Thus, the Unicorn shifted the bulk of their forces to this end of their holdings. This led to the Dragon, Lion, Scorpion, and Crab clans all pushing into Unicorn territory which was granted to them by their Clan Charter. The Unicorn also didn’t have sufficient members in Otosan Uchi to have representation in the Imperial Chancellary when it was eventually formed under Emperor Hantei the 10th.

After ruling Medin al Salaat for ~700 years, trade with gaijin lands was banned, which considerably weakened the Unicorn regime. As another language-related notes on the names of things, “ki-rin” is the word for “Unicorn” in both the Moto and Salaam languages ("Salaam" is the most common language spoken in Medin al Salaat). The “Ki Rin Trail” is literally the “Unicorn trail”, because it was heavily used prior to the banning of gaijin trade.

This contributed to the Unicorn losing power a century later, being pushed out by the Khadi-backed caliph, who unified the factions of the city in a way never done before to drive out the Unicorn clan.

The Unicorn proceeded to actually “leave” the city en masse and returned in force to their ancestral lands, where they declared war on the Dragon, Lion, Scorpion, and Crab clans.

→ The Dragon almost immediately negotiated a peace treaty which involved Mirumoto Januko giving up almost (but not quite) all of the land they had taken over the centuries in exchange for the Unicorn permanently giving up all claim to the Ryusei domain.

→ The Scorpion suffered an early defeat and gave up all claims to all Unicorn lands immediately, though they proceeded to support the Cran and Lion war efforts, possibly out of spite.

→ The Crab fought for some time and were driven back but managed to hold the entire Shinomen forest, denying the Unicorn any access to it.

→ The Lion clan was eventually driven back to their original border of the Drowned Merchant River, though they fought the longest and got considerably more concessions from the Unicorn clan as part of the peace treaty.

When the Unicorn returned, one of the families they brought back with them was the Moto family, which settled into modern Moto lands to the west of the Twilight Mountains.  Many claimed that the Moto are simply gaijin who swore fealty to the Unicorn clan in Medin al Salaat, and that the Unicorn effectively brought back an army of barbarians with them.

The Moto who came with the Unicorn claim that they were originally from modern Moto lands, and settled into the pasturelands to the southwest of Medin al Salaat after following Shinjo west across the Burning Sands Desert.  The Moto family of the Unicorn refer to the Moto who still live there as "those who remained", and they refer to themselves as "those who returned".

However, "those who remained" contend that this is wrong, and that the Moto are originally from the southwest pasturelands of Medin al Salaat, and while they do refer to themselves as "those who remained", they refer to the Moto who still swear fealty to the Unicorn lands as "those who departed", and consider them distant cousins who have settled into other lands.







One of the PCs in a previous campaign, Kitsuki Tetsu, became the Moto Minister of Justice.  Although he did not swear fealty to Moto Gaheris, he was still permitted to occupy such a high position in part due to the vows he swore.  Gaheris is a deeply religious man who respects men who swear vows to the fortunes, so as daimyo he was comfortable with a man such as Tetsu being placed in this kind of position of authority - though many of Gaheris' retainers resented Tetsu for this!

Aa the Moto began to enjoy military success against the Uru, Tetsu began to recruit Uru "daotai", who are basically the Uru equivalent of magistrates, to serve under him and administer the law during wartime.  One of these was "Kirghiz Bashi", a much-respected daotai known throughout Uru lands for his honesty and courage.

Here is what Bashi wrote to Tetsu when asked to compose a report on the Moto:

To His Excellency Kitsuki Tetsu,

You have asked about the Moto, but there are two Moto peoples on the two sides of the western desert. Each of them claim to live in their ancestral homeland, but it is the Moto who ride under the banner of Moto Gaheris who are correct, and those who live to the southwest of Medinat al Salaam have been deceived by false histories and doctrines.

You might ask how I can draw such a strong conclusion, when each group of Moto are unable to present a convincing case. The Moto are a secretive people, who keep hidden their laws and histories, and thus most Moto do not know how men came to ride horses. By examining this history, we can locate the true ancestral homeland of the Moto people, despite the histories of the Uru people having very little information about the Moto.

I don’t know how much knowledge of history you possess, so I will present the relevant facts as if I were arguing a case before you, rather than relying on an assumption of shared knowledge. The sahir Rena is the foremost authority on these histories, and if she becomes available for your consultation she can relied upon to answer any questions about the gods and their relationship to humans.

Before humankind existed, there was the creator Tenri, who always was and always will be. Tenri’s first creation was Erlikonder, with whom he partnered when creating heaven and earth. Tenri created Gunahn, who you know as Amaterasu, or Lady Sun, who embodies warmth, and whose rays Tenri used in the creation of the earth. Erlikonder created Aybaba, who you know as Onnotangu, or Lord Moon, who embodies coldness. Without this mixture, those who came before could not have created the gen, who you know as the “kami”, who themselves gave birth to the plants and animals of the world and to all the races of humans and other creatures. This tempering was also required for the sun and moon to give birth to the Hantei to rule over the gen, for without a precise mixture of the heavenly forces of warmth and cold, no god could ever assume physical form on earth.

Erlikonder became prideful after seeing the success of his work, and so Tenri created another place for him, from which he could banished from heaven. Erlikonder was arrogant but not unfair, so Tenri created the underworld and placed him in charge of judging the souls of the dead. Not being content with having so little control over the world above, Erlikonder created Kurmez, who had the power to send souls back into the world as spirits. I understand that captured Uru warriors who are released by the Moto must first swear oaths by Erlikonder and Kurmez using their Moto names King Yan and Wei Tin, as well as swearing by two other gods of the underworld of which I am not familiar. This is not surprising, as the Moto people of ages past are known to have worshiped Erlikonder and the other gods of the underworld, especially Kurmez through whose subordinate spirits human worship is solicited.

Because Erlikonder was banished to the underworld, the influence of Gunahn was stronger than that of Aybaba among the gen and gods of the world. Amaz, the god of fire, had more control over the world, which was upsetting to Sakha, the goddess of water. At this time, the Altin (“gold”) mountains to the east had a high golden peak, for which the Altin mountain range was named, and this peak connected heaven and earth. Sakha climbed the Altin peak to reach heaven and petitioned Tenri for balance.

Tenri granted her request, and allowed her to pour water down the mountain until balance was reached. Sakha poured so much water that it eroded the Altin mountain peak down into the Valley of the Lost Mountain, which the Moto rode through at the beginning of their invasion. This water spread out to the east and west, populating many lakes and rivers, with most of it flowing into what became two oceans. The ocean of the west separated our people from the lands to the west, and you surely know of the ocean to the east, which lies next to the city of the Hantei.

After this balance was brought to the world, the gen were able to give birth to new creatures. Some of them were monsterous and terrifying, such as the ogres of the south and the Vodyanoy of the north. One of these creatures was the horse, which most men fled from as herds of these terrifying monsters trampled their crops and scattered their flocks. It was our ancestor Uru who tamed the first horse and recognized the beauty of its majestic strength. Uru sold his tame horses to all of the peoples he could reach, to the Kozakthay in the north, to the Ki Rin in the east, and to the tribes of the south.

This new balance caused Gunahn and Aybaba to quarrel, and Erlikonder called upon old affections to turn his son Aybaba against his wife. Kurmez created a prison underneath the western ocean and with Aybaba’s help, Gunahn was trapped there, guarded by the spirit minions of Kurmez. Amaz, the god of fire, worried about the lack of light and heat on the world, and so gifted a golden mirror to a man named Ali from Medinat al Salaam. The mirror showed Ali how to reach the prison and distracted its spirit guardians, allowing him to break the seal which bound Gunahn to the prison. Gunahn boiled the western ocean into nothing but burning sands as she ascended back into heaven.

With the ocean now having become a desert, the Ki Rin were able to move west, using the horses sold to their ancestors by Uru to conquer the city of Medinat al Salaam. When the Ki Rin were eventually driven out, most of the Moto returned, with some staying behind, having forgotten their ancestral homeland next to the Altin mountains.

You see, we can be confident that the Moto of the south are the original Moto, and those who remained by Medinat al Salaam are settlers, because horses were birthed by the gen after the western ocean was poured to earth by Sakha. Indeed, examine the horses ridden by the Moto of the east and the Moto of the west and you will find they are of similar breeding, from the stock of the horses sold by Uru himself to the tribes of the south.

Thus, it is clear that the tribe of Gaheris is correct in its claim that theirs is the true homeland of the Moto people. They must have ridden west with the Ki Rin, leaving behind only scattered and sparsely populated tribes. Indeed, Uru histories to confirm that the Ki Rin, when they ruled the city of Medinat al Salaam, would conscript the men of the south to serve in their armies in the west. It was well known to the Uru that we should not raid the tribes of the south in the lands now ruled by Gaheris, for this would evoke the ire of the Ki Rin, who would send armies or assassins or kadibaba or all three against those who might dare to conduct such raids.

I hope this report is satisfactory, as it should answer the question of the Moto homeland. I am not generally knowledgeable about the Moto or the Ki Rin, but if you have other particular questions I can find those who are and discern the correct answers for you as I have done here.

Daotai Kirghiz Bashi
Magistrate under Kitsuki Tetsi, the Minister of Justice of the Moto clan

Note that Bashi incorrectly refers to the Moto as a "clan" rather than a family of the Unicorn clan.  Apparently the northern tribes consider the Moto to be allies of the Unicorn rather than vassals of them.  Considering how fiercely independent the Moto are and how much they hew to their own ways, this isn't an entirely unreasonably assessment!

Regardless, readers should note the similarities this account has with Rokugani religion and also the differences.  In particular, "Tenri" is not a figure which we had previously established in Rokugani religion, though it's certainly possible that such a figure could exist.  Some of the characters are recognizable and could be mapped onto Rokugani deities, and other events don't match anything in Rokugan's history, but since many of these events take place before the dawn of the Empire, it's entirely possible that Rokugan's history is incomplete and the Uru history is correct. Or perhaps their story is simply wrong, and is an invention of their storytellers, or perhaps some of it is wrong and other bits are accurate.







In the interest of discussing different gaijin religions, here are some notes I wrote about the city, culture, and religion of Medin al Salaat.  Note that I say some things about the fictional language of Salaam in my notes, which is loosely inspired by a combination of historical things and real language facts as well as just stuff I made up because it seemed interesting.  I also drew heavily on the Legend of the Burning Sands material when creating writeups of the city and its factions.

Medin al Salaat is the closest gaijin city to the empire of Rokugan. It is the center of a city-state, which the gaijin refer to as a “caliphate”.

The first part of the name “Medin al Salaat” comes from a word with several related words and meanings:

→ The "medina" is the golden gaijin coin which is the official currency of that city-state.

→ The related word "medin" literally means “value”.

→ The related word "medinat" means “price”, and refers specifically to something which is paid, given up, or sacrificed. While most commonly used in financial terms, one who wanted to threaten another might refer to “the price of crossing me”, which would also use the word "medinat".

Salaam is the name of the gaijin language most commonly spoken in Medin al Salaat. However, the word "salaam" has multiple meanings and related words:

→ Salaam is the name of the language most commonly spoken in the Burning Sands, as well as the general word for “speech” or “speaking”. The conjugation is the same in in both uses, though contextually the meaning is different.

→ It’s also used as a greeting, especially for strangers. The most common way to greet a stranger in Rokugan is to ask, “Have you eaten?” Whereas in this most common gaijin greeting, saying “Salaam!” which conveys “let us speak together!”.

→ Because of this usage, it also conveys peacefulness, and is also their word for “peace”. Thus, as a greeting this seems to mean, “let us speak peacefully together rather than fight”. Historical records of the Hidden Way indicate that this greeting conveys a binding promise not to initiate any fighting – sort of a “we come in peace and will not attack you because we only want to talk”.

→ The Salaam language does not have different words for fighting, battles, or war – all three concepts use the same word (“senpet”). Thus, the gaijin mentality (at least for these particular gaijin) is that one is either in a state of being able to speak with someone (salaam) or fighting them (senpet). It’s unclear whether this is literally true – in Rokugan there are emissaries and meetings during wartime between enemies, so people are capable of speaking while at war with one another. The uncivilized gaijin may be incapable of this, either because of their barbaric temperament or because they lack the organizational capacity, traditions, and Imperial enforcement of laws/norms that make such meetings possible. Or perhaps this is a metaphor and not literally true.

→ The word "salaat" is related to the word salaam, and means “prayer”.

Putting this all together, the name Medin al Salaat literally means “the value of prayer”. Under the rule of the Unicorn clan, this was a sign of their devotion to the fortunes and the benevolence of heaven. Under the current rulers whose Khadi allies practice maho openly, it may have a degrading tone, possibly implying that prayer has no value. This would be in line with other known gaijin sayings, e.g. the infamous and often-repeated motto “Rich men, poor men, wise men, foolish men, good men, evil men – without water, they are all dead men.”

However, the city originally had a different name, Medinat al Salaam. Putting together what’s listed above, this name means “the price of speech” or possibly “the price of peace”.

Records from the early days of the Empire are poor, and Hantei Kajimitsu’s “History of Early Rokugan” speaks little of gaijin lands. He does refer to “the city of Medin al Salaat”, which is the earliest reference to the city. However, historians have found copies of documents whose originals are said to be even older, which indicate that prior to Shinjo’s children conquoring the city it was known as “Medinat al Salaam”, and it was changed to “Medin al Salaat” by the early Unicorn clan.

I realize that much of what I've written above doesn't actually fit with real-life languages, even though it draws a little from it.  "Salaam" is a real word, but my various meanings and implications and conjugations are mostly invented for this fictional setting.  I hope this was nevertheless clear and made sense in and of itself when disregarding real, historical languages.

Salaam is the language spoken by the Almekhem, who are the current dominent nobility of the city.  I'll start explaining details about the city's different ethnic groups, and I'll start with the Almekhem:

The “prophet” Mekhem founded the city in pre-history, during the times of the warlords prior to the dawn of the Empire. This group are known as the “of Mekhem” in Salaam – they are the original speakers of Salaam. The Almekhem were still the largest ethnic group in the city when the Unicorn left, though it’s unclear whether this is still the case today. However, Salaam continues to be the most commonly spoken language in the city, based on what the Hidden Way is told by incoming silver caravans, so presumably they are still a large force. They are mainly known today for being merchants.

Mekhem became the first Sultan and his son and grandson after him, for an unknown number of generations until Shinjo’s children arrived and took control of the city.

Local folklore holds that the city existed for many centuries before being conquored by the Unicorn, though there are no historical texts to support that, and it’s unclear whether humanity even existed at the point in time when locals claim their city may have been founded.

The Hanan Caliphate:

The city is ruled by a Caliphate. The oldest female daughter of the previous Caliph is first in the line of succession. It’s unclear why only female rulers are permitted – under the previous Sultanate the rulers were all male.

The Hanan is the name of the family who rules, and the current ruler is named Hanan Talibah.  In fact every ruler goes by this name, so presumably the current ruler is Hanan Talibah the <number>, though it's not clear to those in Rokugan where she is in the counting of the family line.  It’s also unclear whether the Hanan family was originally Almekhem or from one of the other factions or even from outside the city. However, they continue to speak Salaam and don’t have their own language, which implies they possible came from the Almekhem.

They are said to control a special type of elemental kami known as djinn, though it’s unclear whether this is true or just a folk superstition. Most shugenja doubt that the 5 elements are fundamentally different from place to place, so if djinn exist at all, they may be a type of kansen (corrupted elemental kami). However, the claim is also made that djinn will not follow a khadi (see below) because of their Shadowlands taint, and that is why the khadi are incapable of seizing control of the city themselves, and tsukai are capable of dealing with kansen, so perhaps djinn don’t even exist.

The Caliph is “The Final Arbiter of all Disputes”, though in practice most factions resolve their internal disputes without involving the caliphate, so like an Imperial magistrate who only adjudicates issues between members of different clans, the Caliphate is said to mainly handle inter-factional disputes. However, like most of the information that Rokugan has about the city, this is centuries old, so it’s unknown whether this is still the case.

Note that djinn were something that I found challenging, since they are hugely important to this gaijin setting, but are difficult to reconcile with with Rokugan's cosmology, so I tried to emphasize the ambiguity.







The Qabal of the Sahir:

“Sahir” is the Salaam word for “shugenja”. Their magic is different in that they do not have exactly the same spells, though they command the elements in similar ways, commune with the elemental kami, and their magics have similar effects. Water heals, fire harms, earth protects, and air diverts. The nemuranai (elemental-kami-infused magic items) they create are said to be similarly different-but-operating-on-similar-properties.

It’s unclear whether the Sahir are their own faction. The Qabal of the Sahir is like a "low-rent version" of the Council of Elemental Masters, as well as the name of their arcane school where all sahir train. It has a significant fortressed section of the city all to itself, and they manage their own affairs, though it’s not obvious whether “they” are an ethnicity unto themselves or if like the shigenja families of Rokugan the Qabal is mainly where the magic-wielders from all over have congregated. There is definitely a “Sahiri” language, though most or all Sahir are said to speak Salaam as well.

Note that here I have tried to keep things consistent, while still allowing for more exotic things like flying carpets.  Rokugan already has "nemuranai", so describing a flying carpet in this way seems to be a good way to reconcile these conflicting systems.  

The Ashalan:

“Ashalan” is the Salaam word for “tattooed”. The Ashalan were said to be the original farmers in the area “who dug the canals” before the city was build by the Almekhem. They are now mainly known for being merchants. It’s unclear how large they are, but when the Unicorn left they were said to be “one of the largest” factions in the city. They mainly speak their own language, though like most in the city they also speak Salaam in order to deal and trade with others.

The Rashari:

The word “rashari” in Salaam literally means “caravaner”, so the Rashari are known as traveling merchants. They speak their own language, and most Rashari don’t even speak Salaam – they have designated speakers who deal with outsiders. They are from the far west and most of their people live hundreds (or perhaps thousands) of miles from Medin al Salaat.

The Hidden Way, the smuggling syndicate which trades silver for silk and porcelean, has dealt with many Rashari caravans over the centuries which come in along the Ki Rin trail across the desert. Currently one of the recurring caravans is led by “Rajko”, who is a Rashari. He has no close relatives in the city, though has said that there are many living there who are “cousins of my cousins”, though this seems to imply a “more distant than just a 2nd cousin” relation.

The Khayal:

Known as the Desert Jackals (“Khayal” is the Salaam word for “jackal”), the Khayal are perhaps the only faction more known for being farmers than merchants. They live mainly outside the city and farm whatever land is arable.

The Nizari:

“Nizari” is the Salaam word for “assassin”, and this reputation is said to be well-earned, as any who cross them will discover. Unlike the Desert Jackals, the Assassins live both inside and outside the city walls, and are said to practice their own form of shadow magic. Some have recently wondered whether they are aligned with Lord Moon, based on some similarities to moon cultist powers. In particular, they are said to know of the location of a cave outside the city which contains a portal to yomi, the realm of the honored dead, and their acolytes are taken there to witness the glory which awaits them if they remain true to their honored elders.

Despite their name and reputation, the Nizari are interacted with mainly as farmers and merchants.

The Houses of Dahab:

The word “dahab” in Salaam literally means “merchant”, so more than any other faction the Dahab are known for being merchants.

You may have noticed that a majority of factions are “known for being merchants”. This has been commented on by Rokugani historians of gaijin lands. Some have wondered who is buying all of the goods being sold – since merchants don’t produce anything but merely buy and sell, it’s difficult to understand how an entire city can have what sounds like a majority of its population working as merchants.

Regardless, the Dahab are divided into different merchant houses, though all of them share a common language. However, as merchants they universally speak Salaam, since no merchant “worth his water” would be incapable of speaking the city’s trade language.

The Moto:

Known to the “real” Moto as “those who remained”, there are indeed nomadic, pastoralist, horse-riding peoples distantly related to those who currently live in Moto lands. They are said to still speak the Moto language there – although there are no recent attestations to this effect, it seems reasonable since there’s little that would have changed this. They are said to live to the southwest of the city.

It’s unclear to historians whether current Moto lands are the original ancestral lands of the Moto, or if they’re originally from the plains on the other side of the Burning Sands desert where this group of “Moto” live. Regardless, these people live the Moto lifestyle within riding distance (i.e. within a few hundred miles) of Medin al Salaat, and they come to the city to trade, though they are said to use "Argoki" (a rudimentary sign language used for trading) more commonly than they speak Salaam.

Note that one theme in these writeups is that I tried to take existing historical myths and stories whose underpinnings might not be directly applicable to Rokugan, such as the Assassin's habit of taking people to Paradise, and adapt those stories to fit within Rokugan's cosmology.

The PCs never actually visited the city in person during this past campaign, but they did end up there as part of a "dream quest".  I sometimes like to have adventures take place in the Realm of Dreams, in which the PCs enter a shared dream where they must overcome obstacles to gain some information or achieve some other goal.

Here was the description I wrote for this particular dream quest:

The PCs find themselves standing on the Moto steppes, between the Twilight mountains and the Burning Sands Desert.
They can see both of these things as clearly as if they were next to them but can also see the distances between them.
The rock seat at Chai Sedo is said to be a scale on the Earth Dragon's head, but you can see clearly now that the
north and south sides of the Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands appear as arms, and as the sky above presses
down, and the weight of the air threatens to crush the world beneath it, the arms of the Earth Dragon hold up the sky.
You also see the Burning Sands desert, not as a stretch of land, but as a barrier, not between places but between worlds,
a shimmering veil separating one world from another.

To be clear, these things look to you as they have always looked, but you are seeing now with eyes unclouded, and you can see
that they have always looked this way, because this is what they have always been.

You then feel the world move around you.  Or perhaps you are moving.  It's impossible to tell, because distance and
movement are illusions.  But the veil passes around you, and you find yourself outside Medin al Salaat.  The city-state
is warded above and below by jinn.  Earth jinn protect the land from the underworld below, water jinn guard the streams
and canals, air jinn maintain a raging hurricane in the air above, and fire jinn have constructed a wall of fire around
the outskirts of the lands surrounding the city.  You would be completely unable to enter here normally, even in a dream... except that you are being led by an honored ancestor.  And while the Earth jinn despise nothing more than the essence
of Jigoku and would annihilate any oni or ghost or shinigami or mujina, they have been specifically instructed to permit
ancestor spirits from Yomi safe passage, and so you are safely led past the dangers.  Interestingly, your yomi guides
are not your own ancestors, but rather those who have been sent to guide you here.

You find yourself outside the legendary walls of Medin al Salaat.  The walls were were built to protect from Moto raids,
and they seem to tower up to the heavens.  The truth you seek is inside the city, but you will need to make your way inside.
Fortunately, you'll have help!  There are Moto here.  Not the Moto who ride with Gaheris, but the "Moto who remained", the
Moto who live to the southeast of Medin al Salaat.

That was the description I wrote to introduce the PCs to the shared dream they found themselves in.  While outside the city, they were able to interact with the various factions, learning secrets which would be difficult to discover in the waking world, and coming to better understand these factions.  This understanding and these secrets are not the primary purpose of the dream quest, but rather are a sort of "side mission", where if the PCs want to brave the dangers of lingering too long in this dream, they can gain additional rewards in the form of knowledge and wisdom.







The major challenge of that initial scene was to manage to breach the walls of the city to win their way inside.  Once they did, they found themselves in the Court of the Caliph, witnessing a past event from 1 year earlier, which helps them to learn about how these events of the past led to their current circumstances.  Here was the introduction I wrote to that second scene, which I am including here for future context, in case we later end up discussing how real-life things can appear in dreams.

The Uru have arrived in Medin al Salaat, to meet with Caliph Hanan Talibah in the Uru month known as "the reaping",
and the Uru have come to the city state to seek counsel and support against the Moto.  Timur
Beg, the leader of the Uru, has arrived with "onder" (khan) Eguden Yeke and onder Perhat Bugra.  Beg introduces himself to
the Caliph's court by his many titles, as the "Uru onder" (khan of the Uru), as the "Onder ilg Onder" (khan of khans), as the
"Genel Ordular ilg Uru Kabeel" (general of the armies of the Uru clan), and most importantly by the title granted to his grandfather
by the Caliph's grandmother, the "Alhukm Alniha ilg Almunazaat" (unlike the other titles, this one is in Salaam rather than Uru and means "the final arbitur of all disputes").

In the Caliph's court are the most esteemed of the factions.  The most numerous are the
noble families of the Almekhem, who ruled the city under the Sultunate before the Ki Rin
conquered the city and who now once again administer holdings under the Caliph.  However,
in this dream they are faceless masses, just as the Moto families were who helped your raids
and acted as your bodyguards.  Here you discern that the individual Almekhem matter little,
for whatever their noble blood they serve at the pleasure of the Caliph and act as extensions
of her will.

The khadi are also present - in particular two senior khadi, each of the with an apprentice.
One of the senior khadi is the Caliph's grand vizier, and the other is her slave.  Each khadi
carries an obsidian sword, and other than the Caliphs personal guard they are the only ones
permitted to carry such weapons in the Caliph's court.  The faces of all 4 of the khadi cannot
be seen, because none of them are in possession of their own names.  Instead you see different
faces cycle back and forth.  On the vizier and the slave, the faces shift so quickly that your
eyes cannot focus on them for even an instant, whereas on their apprentices faces linger for
many seconds before cycling between a smaller number of the faces of those whose names they
have taken.

The Nizari are also present - while as you've already seen their population lives mainly
outside the city, they also have emissaries here. Their leader, who represents them here,
is the Old Man of the Mountain.

The Qabal of the Sahir are present - Hakhim of the Firmament, Kaleel the Stormwind, and Shilah
the Flame.  Their colleague, the keeper of the oasis, is not present.

Finally, the Houses of Dahab are represented, primarily by their spokesperson Menjari,
who brings all disputes on behalf of the Dahab to the Caliph.

Eguden Yeke translates for the Uru, as he apparently speaks Salaam.  After the Uru present
themselves to the Caliph's court, they retire to a private counsel.  The Caliph Hanan Talibah,
who rules the city, is present with her advisors.  In particular she has invited the Old Man
of the Mountain, who leads the Nizari, as well the several khadi, to advise her in this meeting.

That was the second scene of the dream quest.  Here there were deeper secrets to be learned, and I have a separate rules system for dream quests which is used to determine how successful the PCs are and how damaging this can be.


