
I'm the GM for a Legend of the Five Rings campaign.  My version of Rokugan is based on how the setting is portrayed in the original L5R source books, but with many additional details added and in some cases things which have outright changed.





I should probably start by talking about my version of Rokugan, which I run as a "low fantasy" setting.  Magic and gods and other supernatural things exist, but they are relatively rare.  However, because they exist, people are justifiably superstitious, since it is difficult to tell which of your prayers and practices are helpful and which produce no effect.

Thus, rather than focus on the supernatural, I'd like to begin by discussing the physical, material reality of Rokugan, how it's organized, etc.  I generally describe Rokugan as "Japanese samurai culture with Chinese geography".  Even saying "samurai culture" is reductive since e.g. Heian-period Japan was significantly different than Edo-period Japan.  Similarly, saying "Chinese geography" isn't quite right, since Rokugan's geography doesn't look very much like China, but the phrase does convey that Rokugan is not an island surrounded on all sides by water and that it is much larger than Japan.

With this in mind, let's talk about some demographic information.  As with everything I've done with the setting, I started with information presented in the original L5R books and then extrapolated from there.

Rokugan is about 1500 miles top-to-bottom and about 1000 miles across, which totals about 1,500,000 square miles.

It has a total population of about 100,000,000 humans divided into approximately 350 domains.  Samurai are about 2% of the total population, which is about 2 million people.

HIERARCHIES:

Most of the land in Rokugan is divided between the 7 Great Clans, though there are additional holdings administered directly by Imperial families and a handful of Minor Clans.

Each of the Great Clans is divided into 3-5 Great Families, of which one is the ruling family.

Each of the Great Families has a ruling House which oversees a single domain, with the rest of the family's holdings being divided into many other domains, each ruled by a vassal House.

Each domain is further divided into provinces, overseen by a Provincial Governor, who lives in the provincial city, which is usually central to the province.

Each province is divided into counties, administered by a County Magistrate, who lives in the town which is usually central to the county.

Each county is divided into Village Districts, overseen by a peasant Village Headsman who lives in the main village.

Each village district usually has a number of small outlying farming communities known as hamlets.  (Hamlet here just refers to a small farming community.  The word in Europe originally referred to a farming community organized around orchards rather than farms, but we don't use it that way, and here it simply refers to a small cluster of farms which belongs to a village district and is overseen by a village headsman who is lives in the main village and not in the hamlet.)

THE MEDIAN DOMAIN:

The median domain is around 3,750 square miles of land, which would be a little over 70 miles across if the domain were circular - no domain is actually shaped this way, but "70 miles across" is a good first approximation of the size of the median domain.

Note that we describe the "median" domain rather than the "average" (mean) domain, since a small percentage of domains are extremely large - this is the reason why Rokugan has approximately 350 domains rather than 400, which is the number you would get if you divided the total population by the population of the median domain.  Most of the time, the larger domains tend to be the ruling domains of a great Family and/or Clan, e.g. the Mirumoto domain is the largest in Dragon lands and is several times the size of the median domain, much larger than the domains of other Mirumoto vassal houses.

The median domain has around 250,000 total human population, with approximately 5,000 samurai (given that samurai are approximately 2% of the population).

The capital of the domain is usually close to the center of the domain, with roads connecting to each of its provincial cities.  Each level within the domain usually has around half a dozen units, e.g. approximately 6 provinces per domain, approximately 6 counties per province, etc.

Here is how the population of the domain is divided between these various levels:

Category             Count   Population     Population      Percent
                             (individual)   (total)         of domain
the capital          1       12,000         ~12,000         ~5%
provincial cities    6       2000 - 4000    ~18,000         ~7%
large towns          36      900 - 1500     ~43,000         ~18%
small villages       216     200 - 500      ~75,000         ~30%
tiny hamlets         1296    50 - 100       ~97,000         ~40%

The above numbers cover the total human population, but let's discuss the samurai population specifically.  The median domain has around 5,000 samurai.  A child legally becomes an adult during their gempukku at the age of 14, and is considered a "useful" adult until they retire.  The default age at which one is eligible for retirement is 40, at 50 it is encourage, and at 60 it is mandatory without special dispensation from your daimyo.

Rokugan samurai culture is more egalitarian with respect to gender than historical samurai culture, mainly because we want the game to be welcoming to female players, and roleplaying constant intense sexism isn't fun for most male players.  Thus, we consider the population of "useful" adults as being equal for both sexes.

Of the 5,000 samurai in the domain, approximately 3,000 (~60%) are past their gempukku (and thus legally adults) and have not yet retired.  Of these ~3,000 "useful" samurai:
-> ~1000 samurai live in the capital
-> ~250 samurai in each of the ~6 provincial cities
-> ~15 samurai live in each of the 36 towns

Note that county towns are the lowest level at which samurai live.  Village districts are farming communities populated by peasant farmers with no samurai living there.  At most a samurai family might maintain a country estate close to some farmland, but the estate would never to be considered to be part of the village/hamlet and most certainly would not be under the authority of any peasant village headsman.

Samurai are typically ~80% bushi (warriors), ~10% courtiers, and ~10% merchants, though this varies by Clan and Family.

PLACE NAMES:

Although there are a few exceptions, we generally use the same names for:
-> a domain and its capital city
-> a province and its provincial city
-> a county and its town
-> a village and its district

This is not usually the case with real human societies, e.g. the capital of the United States of America is not "America City" and the capital of Virginia is not "Virginia City".  However, having to remember lots of extra names is bad, so in Rokugan we keep these things the same, e.g.
-> the capital of the Damasu domain is Kyuden Damasu (even though it is also often known by its nickname of "Toshi Ranbo")
-> the provincial city of Owari is in the Owari province
-> the town of Hikobayashi is where the country magistrate oversees Hikobayashi county

CASTES:

Rokugan has a strict caste system, which is part of the Celestial Order.  The Hantei Emperor is the Son of Heaven, descended from the Sun and Moon, and owns all of the land everywhere in the world, though gaijin barbarians fail to recognize his authority, so taxes are collected within the Emerald Empire.  The samurai (known as "those who make war" or "those who serve") make up the ruling class, and are the only caste with full personhood - samurai are "people", and this is why we often refer to "inhabitants" or "humans" when talking about populations.

Heimen are "half-people" and include farmers and merchants.

Hinin are "non-people" and laborers, servants, and entertainers.  The lowest part of the hinin caste are the eta, or "untouchables" who perform ritually unclean labor such as mortians and tanners and those who handle "night-soil" (human feces).

Monks exist outside the Celestial Order, walking as the Shinsei did with one foot in this world and one foot in the spiritual realm.  Although monks are a small part of the population (less than 1%) they are enormously influential due to the reverence held by humans of all castes for the gods and their servants and those who preach the Tao of Shinsei.

Here's a list of some example professions and subsets of the lower castes:

Hinin:
-> Entertainers, including these examples:
    Wrestlers
    Musicians
    Restraunteurs
    Actors
    Masseurs
    Sex Workers (prostitution is illegal in Rokugan by Imperial decree but such laws are "honored more in breach than observance")
    "Carnies" (Jesters, Jugglers, Magicians, etc)
-> Beggars
-> Laborers, especially these examples:
    Porters
    Servants
    Palequin Carriers
    Cooks
    Ditch Diggers
    Charcoal burners
    Miners
    Salt burners
    Quarrying
    Basketmakers
    Animal Handlers
-> Criminals (someone who starts as e.g. a farmer and turns to crime has been reduced to a hinin and will be recognized as such if caught)
-> Bankruptees (the particulars vary by the laws of different localities, but e.g. merchants can be reduced to mere laborers through bankruptcy)

Eta (the "untouchables" of the hinin class, such that all eta are hinin but not all hinin are eta):
-> Tanners
-> Fullers
-> Butchers
-> Cremators
-> Morticians (this is often work performed by monks, especially in cities)
-> "Poopsmiths" (the actual term is "Owaiya" which refers to people who handle "night soil")
-> Torturers (extremely rare, but occasionally employed under certain legally restricted circumstances)
-> Executioners (samurai executions are performed by samurai, but all other executions are performed by eta)

Heimen:
-> Farmers
-> Merchants (the line between "merchant" and one of the below categories is often meaningless)
-> Carpenters
-> Masons
-> Smiths
-> Thatchers
-> Coopers
-> Potters
-> Joiners
-> Weavers (and other fibercrafters of all sorts, spinners, embroiderers, sewers, tailors, etc)
-> Mirror polishers
-> Togishi (sword polishers)
-> Jewelers
-> Painters
-> Sculptors
-> Scribes
-> Leather workers (note that this is different from Eta tanners)
-> Oil pressers
-> Soy sauce brewers
-> Sake brewers
-> Millers
-> Noodlers
-> Sesame grinders
-> Confectioners
-> Tofuya
-> Millwrights

MONEY:

Rokugan's unit of currency is the koku, which is a gold coin.  1 koku also refers to "the amount of rice needed to feed a man for a year", which is approximately 40 gallons of rice.  Rokugan can be said to be on the "rice standard" in that regardless of the current market value of rice (i.e. how much it would cost to buy 40 gallons of rice in a city), 40 gallons of rice and 1 koku gold coin are always legally equivalent for the purpose of paying rent or taxes, by Imperial decree.

1 koku is worth 10 bu, which is a silver coin.

1 bu is worth 10 zeni, which is a copper coin.

1 zeni is worth 10 sen, which is a small copper piece, usually minted as a connected line of 10 sen which can be severed into either individual pieces or multi-sen blocks in order to literally "make change".

Samurai 

MERCHANT FAMILIES:

Although there are many samurai merchants, those with this sort of logistical training generally hold government posts and do not have time to run their own independent businesses.  Much of the commerce in the Empire is therefore performed by heimen peasant merchant families.

Merchants exist in towns and cities.  We generally divide merchants into four categories: very rich, rich, poor, and other.
- There are about 200 immediate families made up of very rich merchants, which generally make up 4-10 major Merchant families.
- There are about 250 immediate families made up of "rich" merchants, these are the owners of successful businesses whose extended families have great wealth but are not quite on the same level as a "real" merchant family.  These 250 families generally run about 25 - 50 different businesses.

Because these are peasant merchant families, they are not permitted to maintain a family name without special dispensation and recognition from a daimyo.  Thus, if we refer to e.g. "the Masahito merchant family" we are talking about the merchant family of which Masahito is the current patriarch.  When Masahito dies or retires and his son Daiki inherits control of the family, it will become known as "the Daiki merchant family".

In addition to their main businesses, most successful merchants (and all large merchant families) make substantial revenue from owning land.  Most farmers are tenant farmers, and most landlords are merchant landlords, so merchants end up making a sizeable percentage of their revenue through farm rent.

A domain has approximately (based on the numbers we've already established):

    (63 * 6 ** 3 + 13.5 * 6 ** 4 + 144 * 6 ** 2) => 36,288 families of farmers

Farm taxes are capped at 1/3 of the estimated productivity of the land, and rent is capped at 1/6 the productive capacity of the land, and a farming family plot typically has an estimated output of ~15 koku per year.

Thus, on average a plot generates 5 koku of tax revenue per family and 2.5 koku of rent to the landowners (only ~10% of farmers are freeholders), so there's roughly 81,648 koku of rent going to the landowners.

About 6% of samurai are at least of the 5th Rank (samurai ranks will be explained later), which is about 300 total samurai, many of whom are from the same immediate family (and clustered into various lineages, which will also be explained later).

The land in "the median domain" is owned as follows:
-> ~10% by freeholding farmers
-> ~30% by samurai (which is an average of ~5 koku per samurai, though it's not evenly distributed)
-> ~40% by large merchant families (so about three to eight thousand koku per merchant family)
-> ~20% by individual rich merchants (so about three to six hundred koku per business)

Putting this together, a farming family might work a plot of land estimated at 15 koku, so the merchants must collect 7.5 koku.  5 koku of that is passed along to the country magistrate as their tax obligation, and they keep the other 2.5 koku.  However, the landowners are on the hook for the tax burden regardless of what they were able to collect from the farmers, making rent collection often difficult.

ASHIGARU:

One male from every family of farmers with at least two males in the countryside recieves martial training at least once per month.

This is about 10% of farmers, which means about 8% of the countryside have martial training.  The ashigaru deemed good enough (at least 200 XP, which is roughly 20% of the population) are allowed to carry peasant weapons.  So about 2% of farmers are armed and capable of helping deal with criminals and respond to violence with the legal use of weapons.

In a village with its surrounding hamlets (where there are no samurai), there are about 80 ashigaru, of which about 15-20 are good enough to be armed.  We refer to these as "licensed" ashigaru, and those who have not demonstrated enough proficiency to be permitted to carry weapons unsupervised are known as "unlicensed ashigaru".

MONKS:

Shrines and monasteries are controlled by the Ministry of Rites, and are organized as follows:
- each village district has a Country Monk
- each town has a Preceptor per Order
- each province has an Abbot per Order
- each capitol city has a Grand Abbot per Order

Monk ranks are discussed elsewhere, but shrines and temples are staffed by many monks who report to the leaders mentioned above, and their ranks are generally ordered like this:
- Initiate
- Novice
- Acolyte
- Junior Monk
- Adept Monk (Country Monk is equivalent to this)
- Senior Monk (Town Preceptor is equivalent to this)
- Steward
- Abbot
- Grand Abbot

ENTERTAINERS:

Each county generally has an acting troupe, which usually consists of around 5-10 entertainers.  Acting troupes usually contains not only actors but also other entertainers such as jugglers and musicians, who might perform acts before/during/after plays and skits or be incorporated into larger performances.

Approximately once per week, the town in the center of the county will have a "market day", when farmers throughout the county come to town to buy, sell, and barter.  Acting troupes usually make most of their money on market day, though they will frequently travel through the village districts of the county during the rest of the week to perform.

Such "country troupes" perform mainly for peasants, though they must also be prepared for samurai in the audience on market day, and also be capable of giving special performances at the County Magistrates manor for the magistrate and their samurai retainers.

Provincial cities are large enough to usually have several acting troupes in competition with each other, and a domain capital will have numerous entertainers, some devoted to a particular establishment and others working as solo street performers.

Like monks, entertainers are small part of the population (under 1%) but have an outsized influence on the culture and on the daily lives of those they interact with.

BANDITS:

The average domain has about 200 bandits, most of which have a day job but also commit acts of banditry on the side  These acts include:
 - stealing food or other supplies when no one is around
 - mugging or otherwise shaking down peasants where they live/work
 - acting as a highwayman, robbing people on the road
 - joining with other bandits as a gang to attack caravans

Only bandits who are reasonably strong (over 200 XP) will try anything more bold than stealing and hoping no one sees them.  This means that there are about 45 bandits per domain that will use or threaten violence.  Of these, about 10 will be good enough (over 250 XP, which is about 10% of the population) to act as highwaymen or lead bandit gangs.

So the average domain has about 1-5 groups of bandits attacking wealthy travellers/caravans.  These groups usually consist of 4-8 bandits, although they occasionally grow much larger.

About 10 violent bandits are killed each year per domain, both from casualties during their attacks and being caught by the authorities.

MAHO-TSUKAI:

"Maho" is heretical blood magic, and a "tsukai" is a witch who performs it.  A "bloodspeaker" is a type of tsukai who has learned to conceal the Shadowlands taint which infects the bodies of maho practitioners.

Maho is powered by the "strength" of the names of their victims.  Names can be given freely as part of some dark bargain with those desperate enough to turn to a tsukai for help, or used by the tsukai at the moment of death when murdering a victim.  The more famous a person, the more "strong" and "powerful" their name, and thus tsukai rarely target members of the lower classes, instead preferring to kill or bargain with the wealthy and powerful in order to make use of their powerful names.

A typical coven consists of 3-10 bloodspeakers, usually poor peasants. It's rare to find bloodspeakers among samurai or wealthy peasants.

Only a small percentage of covens are violent.  These covens are typically led by a powerful bloodspeaker who previously spread his name violently in the countryside after reaching Rank 5 and taking on the Jama surname.  Thus, about one out of every three domains has an active coven kidnapping and murdering well-known merchants and nobles.

There are about 200 Witch Hunters.  Each Witch Hunter covers about three domains, with large and important cities/domains getting their own Witch Hunter.

It is unknown how many "wild" maho-tsukai exist out in the countryside.  Remember that around 70% of the human population of a domain is in village districts and their surrounding hamlets, where no samurai live - thus, unless the locals report suspicious activity to the authorities the samurai have no way of knowing whether the countryside is free of witches or if instead the farmers are happily making use of their services (or being threatened into silence).

OGRES:

Every year hundreds of ogres manage to enter Rokugan by making it over the Kaiu Wall or through the Burning Sands Desert.  About 1000 ogres live in Crab lands, and another 1000 have settled into Unicorn, Scorpion, and Crane lands.

Ogres typically hide in the countryside, stealing food and livestock to survive. They are solitary creatures and travel either alone or in mated pairs with at most one youngling.  Because they are extremely cunning and fierce fighters, they're very difficult to catch.

However, about 1% of ogres are man-eaters; these ogres typically seek out strong human victims to consume.  These ogres are much more dangerous but also much more easily caught, especially since they prefer to pick targets that look like capable fighters, believing that they gain the power of their victims.

IMPERIALS:

Each domain has an appointed Imperial samurai (and spouse/children if applicable) acting as an Emerald Magistrate.  They have a staff of around ten yoriki (samurai assistants) with them, who are typically from other clans, with perhaps 1-2 being from one of the Imperial families.  The magistrate and yoriki live in the domain's capital but might visit the domain's other cities on the extremely rare occasion when it is necessary to "travel into the provinces".

When fighting breaks out between neighboring daimyo, the yoriki from nearby domains may be assembled to assist one side or the other.  Having one or two hundred extra troops can change the outcome of a battle, and high-ranking Emerald magistrates are not shy about throwing their weight around.

There are also numerous Imperial legions stationed throughout Rokugan.  We have not yet established specific numbers and locations for all of them, but the ones which we've established to exist are:
- the 1st Imperial Legion guards the Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands
- the 2nd Imperial Legion guards Beiden Pass at the Spine of the World Mountains
- the 3rd Imperial Legion guards the Kaiu Wall
- most of the remaining Imperial Legions are also stationed along the Kaiu Wall

CLAN POPULATIONS:

Here's a population breakdown in thousands of samurai in each Clan/Family.  Remmeber that samurai are 2% of the population, so a good rule of thumb is that you can multiple these numbers by 50 to get the total number of humans living in the holdings of each of these families (though the actual population density varies by geographic area).

The 7 clans and their populations are listed below, with all numbers being in thousands (e.g. "300" means "300,000" or three hundred-thousand):

CLAN        TOTAL           RULING      FAMILY
            POPULATION      FAMILY      POPULATIONS

Lion        500             Akodo       275 Matsu, 150 Akodo, 50 Ikoma, 25 Kitsu
Crab        300             Hida        175 Hida, 75 Yasuki, 25 Kaiu, 15 Kuni, 10 Hiruma
Crane       275             Doji        100 Doji, 90 Daidoji, 75 Kakita, 10 Asahina
Scorpion    225             Bayushi     125 Bayushi, 80 Shosuro, 15 Soshi, 5 Yogo
Unicorn     225             Shinjo      75 Shinjo, 75 Otaku, 40 Moto, 20 Ide, 15 Iuchi
Dragon      175             Togashi     125 Mirumoto, 20 Togashi, 15 Agasha, 15 Kitsuki
Phoenix     175             Shiba       100 Shiba, 60 Isawa, 15 Asako

In addition to the above numbers, here are the numbers for Imperials and also the Minor clans:

CATEGORY        TOTAL           FAMILY
                POPULATION      POPULATIONS

Imperial        75              45 Seppun, 15 Hantei, 10 Otomo, 5 Miya
Minor Clans     30              30 Mantis, 15 Dragonfly, 5 Fox/Wasp/Sparrow (the "Three-Man Alliance")

Some things to note about these numbers:
- the Hantei family is relatively small despite containing the Emperor himself, and members of the Hantei family usually marry into other families.
- there are a number of minor clans not listed because they are so small, e.g. the Hare clan has fewer than a thousand samurai

Remember that most families are further divided into Houses, each ruled by a local daimyo.  Some smaller families (such as the Yogo) do not have any vassal houses, whereas larger families (such as the Matsu) have dozens of vassal houses.

EXPERIENCE LEVELS:

Although "XP" is a "metagame concept" because no one in Rokugan talks about "experience points", it's useful for players and GMs to consider how much XP different individuals within society will typically have, how much variance there is, and how many are operating at the highest levels.

A person at their gempukku has on average about 150 XP.  Here's a chart showing what percentage of the population has at least a given amount of XP or higher:

100%       0 XP or greater
~80%     150 XP or greater
~60%     160 XP or greater
~50%     170 XP or greater
~40%     180 XP or greater
~30%     190 XP or greater

~20%     200 XP or greater
~18%     210 XP or greater
~16%     220 XP or greater
~14%     230 XP or greater
~12%     240 XP or greater

~10%     250 XP or greater
~1%      300 XP or greater
~0.1%    350 XP or greater
~0.01%   400 XP or greater
~0.001%  450 XP or greater
~0.0001% 500 XP or greater

When we combine those numbers with the population numbers above, this suggests some things about the setting:

-> In a median domain, there are roughly 300 "useful" samurai with at least 250 XP, roughly 30 "useful" samurai with at least 300 XP, and only around 3 samurai with at least 350 XP.

-> Since there are dozens of county magistrates and provincial officials who work under the Provincial Governor, most people in significant government posts below the rank of governor will typically be in the 250-300 XP range.

-> Certain types of non-samurai individuals such as monks and entertainers will likely be higher on the XP distribution.  For example, although a county might only have 5-10 entertainers, most of those entertainers will likely be high up on the XP distribution for the county of ~6,000 humans due to the nature of their professions.

-> With that being said, we generally do separate the samurai and non-samurai populations and say that they each follow this distribution separately.

It might be tempting for people to think "oh, peasants lead humdrum lives and can's possibly follow the same XP distribution", but this is not the case, and samurai are largely unaware of the dynamic and interesting lives of peasants.  Although we often call this "a samurai game", we also try to include all parts of society, not out of fairness (since this is all fiction) but because the lives of people with different roles and professions is genuinely fascinating!

DEMOGRAPHICS:

With the above in mind, let's look at the populations of different castes and categories in the different places within a domain.  We'll continue talking about "the median domain", to establish a baseline level of expectations.  We'll start with the smallest places and go up from there.  In each case we'll consider the median version of something, e.g. "the median hamlet" or "the median provincial city":

The median hamlet:

%   category
10	eta, poor
70	farmer, rural tenant farmer
5	farmer, poor freeholder
10	farmer, freeholder
5	farmer, wealthy landowner

The median village (remember "village district" refers to a village and its surrounding hamlets, so this section refers only to the village itself):

%   category
1	eta, well-off
7	eta, poor
2	eta, very poor
70	farmer, rural tenant farmer
5	farmer, poor freeholder
10	farmer, freeholder
5	farmer, wealthy landowner

The median town (remember that a "county" is the town and its surrounding village districts, so this is only the town itself):

%   category

1	servants, working for wealthy samurai families
1	servants, working for wealthy merchant families
1.5	Indentured servants, working for non-wealthy merchant families
2	servants, miscellaneous

1	laborers, master (rich)
1	laborers, poor
10	laborers, other

1	merchants, very rich
1	merchants, rich
3	merchants, poor
5	merchants, other

1	eta, well-off
6	eta, poor
3	eta, very poor

50	farmer, rural tenant farmer
2.5	farmer, poor freeholder
5	farmer, freeholder
2.5	farmer, wealthy landowner

2.5	samurai

Remember that the county town is the "lowest" level of organized society that still has samurai - villages and hamlets are peasant-only!  Also note that it's the lowest level to have merchants - this is why farmers come into town for market day approximately once per week.

The media provincial city (i.e. the city central to a province, surrounded by counties):

%   Category

2	servants, working for wealthy samurai families
6	servants, working for wealthy merchant families
6	Indentured servants, working for non-wealthy samurai families
4	Indentured servants, working for non-wealthy merchant families
2	servants, miscellaneous

5	laborers, master (rich)
5	laborers, poor
25	laborers, other

2	merchants, very rich
3	merchants, rich
5	merchants, poor
15	merchants, other

1	eta, well-off
6	eta, poor
3	eta, very poor

1	samurai, merchants
1	samurai, courtiers
8	samurai, bushi

Note that there are no farmers in the median provincial city.  This is largely an artifact of what we count as being "part of the city", i.e. while there are generally no farms within the city's walls, provincial cities are frequently located in areas with rich farmland.  However, these farms are counted by the government as being part of the surrounding county lands, rather than being part of the city itself.

The median domain capital city:

%   Category

2	servants, wealthy samurai families
6	servants, wealthy merchant families
6	servants, non-wealthy samurai families
4	servants, non-wealthy merchant families
2	servants, miscellaneous

5	laborers, master (rich)
5	laborers, poor
25	laborers, other

2	merchants, very rich
3	merchants, rich
5	merchants, poor
15	merchants, other

1	eta, well-off
6	eta, poor
3	eta, very poor

1	samurai, merchants
1	samurai, courtiers
8	samurai, bushi

Note that this is just the same numbers as for a provincial city - it is generally true that in "the median domain" a captial city is simply just a larger version of the domain's provincial cities.

However, in larger domains this is extremely untrue.  See below for an explanation of the largest cities in the Empire:

LARGE CITIES:

"Zipf's law" is a real-world rule of thumb which indicates that the Nth-largest city is roughly 1/Nth the size of the largest city.  We tend to follow that for our demographic depiction of Rokugan.

Otosan Uchi is the capital of the Empire and is also its largest city, with a total population of approximately 1 million humans.

Ryoko Owari (aka Kyuden Michio) is the second-largest city in the Empire, with a population of approximately 500,000.  It is located south of Beiden Pass, which cuts through the Spine of the World Mountains and is the central trading hub for the southern and western halves of Rokugan.  Remember that the capital city of most domains contains only around 5% of the domain's population.  Yet for a city like Ryoko Owari, the city might be half or more of the population of the Michio domain (the Michio are the vassal House of the Shosuro family which control Ryoko Owari).

Toshi Ranbo (aka Kyuden Damasu) is the third-largest city in the Empire, with a population of over 300,000 (the population used to be even higher, but recent war and other fighting has diminished the population by tens of thousands).

Here's a chart of the largest cities in Rokugan and who controls them (note that the numbers more or less follow Zipf's law, though not exactly):

City                Approximate     Owned by
                    Population

Otosan Uchi         1,000,000       Imperial (Hantei)
Ryoko Owari           500,000       Scorpion (Shosuro Family, Michio house)
Toshi Ranbo           300,000       Lion (Akodo Family, Damasu house)
The Yasuki Estates    250,000       Crab
Kyuden Daidoji        200,000       Crane
Shiro Otaku           165,000       Unicorn
Kyuden Shinjo         140,000       Unicorn
Kyuden Matsu          125,000       Lion
Kyuden Doji           110,000       Crane
Kyuden Mirumoto       100,000       Dragon
Kyuden Ikoma           90,000       Lion
Kyuden Akodo           80,000       Lion
Kyuden Hida            75,000       Crab
Kyuden Shiba           70,000       Phoenix
Shiro Shosuro          65,000       Scorpion
Kyuden Bayushi         60,000       Scorpion
Kyuden Tsume           60,000       Crane (Doji Family, Tsume House)
Shinden Isawa          55,000       Phoenix
Kaimetsu Toshi         50,000       Mantis (the Islands of Spice of Silk)
Shinden Togashi        50,000       Dragon

Note that the designation of "Kyuden" means that the city has been found suitable for the Emperor to hold Imperial Winter Court there, while a "Shiro" lacks that designation.  "Shinden" means "temple", and some Family capitals have that designation when they are known primarily as temples - this is common for "shugenja families", i.e. families where shugenja are more common.

The reasons why particular cities are larger/smaller often has a lot to do with various factors such as how close they are to an even larger city which ends up "pulling" away population which otherwise would go to the smaller city, access to waterways, fertility of the land, the overall size of the Clan/Family capital and therefore the size of the administration which is needed, etc.

We've spent a lot of time talking about "the median domain", but the above cities are examples of huge deviations from the median due to these kinds of factors.  Another example of such deviation which drives these city sizes are crop yields, e.g.

-> Crane lands have a geography similar to real-world Vietnam, being long and thin in a north/south direction along the coast.  Although Crane samurai make up less than 15% of the samurai in Rokugan, Crane lands yield over 30% of Rokugan's rice output, with about 20% in the northern corridor around Kyuden Kakita, Kyuden Doji, and Kyuden Tsume and other vassal domains, and about 10% in the south around Kyuden Daidoji and its vassal domains.

-> Around 1/3 of the wheat in Rokugan is grown in the Firely River Valley in Unicorn lands, close to Kyuden Otaku and Kyuden Shinjo.

-> The Yasuki Estates are at the edge of Earthquake Bay, and are therefore the main harbor city for southern Rokugan.  The Yasuki left the Crane clan to join the Crab many centuries ago, and the Crane courtiers who practically run the Imperial Chancellary have, in retribution, refused to ever allow the Yasuki Estates to be designated as a Kyuden despite being far larger than a dozen other cities which have been granted that status.

-> Shinden Togashi is a site of such religious significance that at any given time it has more pilgrims than natives!  The enigmatic Togashi also decline to perform a census, and so true numbers for this mountain temple city are hard to come by.

VILLAGE HEADSMEN:

Since we're discussing populations and occupations and numbers, I've been working on the demographics of Rokugan farming communities and wrote a document called "What exactly is a village headsman", the contents of which are below:

Overview:

Occasionally PCs visit a peasant farming village and need to talk to someone in charge.  We’ve always said that this is the “village headsman”.  However, as much time as we’ve spent fleshing out details about the government of Rokugan, we’ve spent very little time detailing who this is, how they are selected, their responsibilities, what power they have within the village, how they are compensated for their duties, etc.

This document summarizes some things we’ve already established about peasant village life, raises some questions about how farm plots are actually divided up, and makes some suggestions about the possible “real” job of a village headsman.

Random things a village headsman probably does:

We have occasionally mentioned things which the government needs to do, and said that the village headsman is probably the one who does these things.  This includes:

-> Relaying government messages and proclamations.

-> Sending reports of bandit activity or other emergency goings-on to the county magistrate, and leading bandit-hunting teams of ashigaru to investigate bandit reports.

-> Mediating disputes too trivial to bring before the county magistrate.

I’m sure we have more things we’ve listed in the past, but I honestly can’t think of any now.  One thing to note is that birth records, death records, marriage records, and travel records are all the responsibility of the “country monk” for a village district.  Additionally, the military training of ashigaru is handled by the county magistrate.  Finally, we’ve portrayed the overseeing of tenant land owned by large merchant families as being handled by clerks from that merchant family.

In the peasant campaign, the village headsman almost never came up, even in the early part of the campaign when the adventures all took place in the countryside.  Since all of that big stuff was being handled by country monks, county magistrates, and merchant clerks, there wasn’t much left for a village headsman to really do!

"What is a village, and who lives there?"

We wrote an overview of the demographics of Rokugan years ago and have mostly kept to those numbers over time.  As a high-level overview:

-> The median domain has around half a dozen provinces.

-> The median province has around half a dozen counties.

-> The median county has around half a dozen village districts.

-> The median village district consists of a central village with around half a dozen smaller hamlets.  (The word “hamlet” in Europe originally referred to a small community organized around orchards rather than farms, but we use it with the colloquial meaning of “a small village” and most “hamlets” in Rokugan are small farming communities.)

We’ve had to do a lot of guesswork around the default family size, particularly the number of related farmers living in the same thatched-roof cottage.  We generally assume a median household size of 5, split over 2-3 generations, but this isn’t based on any real research of feudal farming communities.  However, using that as a baseline and combining it with the numbers we have for hamlets, villages, and counties:

-> Most hamlets have a population of 50-100 (i.e. 10-20 households)

-> Most villages have a population of 200-500 (i.e. 40-100 households)

-> The median village district as a whole typically has a population of around 800 (or around 160 households)

-> These populations are almost always 100% peasants, as most of the samurai live in the town at the center of the county, where the country magistrate lives.  However, we’ve put almost no thought into what percentage of village districts are anything other than heimin farmers.

-> Monks are probably a negligible percentage - we’ve said that each village district has a single “country monk” on a plot of tax-free land.  The monk may have a few acolytes to help farm the land, which they may do on a part-time basis on loan from larger families in the village.

-> I don’t know enough about the “untouchables” in Japan on which L5R eta are based to be able to make good predictions about them.  This doesn’t matter for most adventures, but it would be good to figure out at some point since this seems like a good source of opportunities for strife and plot hooks.

Rent and taxes:

The above numbers all talk about households who work plots of land.  We occasionally have reason to dive into the numbers, and when we do then here are the general monetary baselines:

-> The median family plot of land produces around 15 koku/year worth of crops

-> The land is taxed at ⅓ of the estimated production.  This is a set amount, such as 5 koku per year, rather than ⅓ of whatever happens to be grown this year.  Thus, farmers who produce more food get to keep all of the excess for themselves.

-> When land is owned by landlords and worked by tenant farmers, the rent is ⅙ the total value of the land.  This means that rent and taxes add up to ½ the value produced.

-> Crucially, taxes are paid by the landowner regardless of what they have been able to collect from the tenant farmers.  If the year is so bad that little could be collected, the full tax amount is still owed.

Remember that 1 koku is “the amount of rice needed to feed someone for a year” (about 40 gallons).  This doesn’t make up all of a human’s nutritional needs, or account for costs of living other than food, so we generally assume that someone “needs” about 2 koku/year to meet the bare minimum needs.  The above numbers mean that an “average” family of 5 only has 7.5 koku/year, which means that they must provide for themselves in non-farming ways as well, e.g. making their own clothes, spinning their own rope, etc.

Dynamic family sizes and farm plots:

Everything in the previous section is more-or-less centered on relatively small nuclear families living in small-ish households working on relatively small plots of land.  This is an accurate portrayal of many modern farms, including my own grandfather’s farm and Julie’s grandfather’s farm.

One issue with this is that family sizes change frequently, not just with births and deaths and marriages (all of which are happening relatively often) but with households merging together, households splitting apart, and family members leaving to go work in the towns and cities.  When a family grows, does the merchant family who owns the farmland assign them a larger plot?  How does that work?  Does the family petition for this?  Does the merchant family assign plots based on family size?  Do they even know the family size?

I’ve been thinking a lot about these assumptions after reading this book review of Seeing Like a State, which led me to buy the actual book, which I have also been reading.  Here’s an excerpt from the book about a specific European farming village:

> Novoselok village had a varied economy of cultivation, grazing, and forestry…the complex welter of strips was designed to ensure that each village household received a strip of land in every ecological zone. An individual household might have as many as ten to fifteen different plots constituting something of a representative sample of the village’s ecological zones and microclimates. The distribution spread a family’s risks prudently, and from time to time the land was reshuffled as families grew or shrunk…The strips of land were generally straight and parallel so that a readjustment could be made by moving small stakes along just one side of a field, without having to think of areal dimensions. Where the other side of the field was not parallel, the stakes could be shifted to compensate for the fact that the strip lay toward the narrower or wider end of the field. Irregular fields were divided, not according to area, but according to yield.

The book itself has these crazy pictures of the way that land was partitioned.  Though the words “plots of land” do factor in, it seems like actually fields were subdivided such that different families work different parts of the same fields.  A single family didn’t work a single contiguous “plot”, but rather many different plots which were themselves pieces of many different fields.

"Maybe this is what a village headsman actually does?"

If we take the above as being representative of a Rokugani farming village, then someone is responsible for assigning different plots to different farmers.  This was often done by village elders, and seems like a reasonable job for a village headsman.

"What does this imply about rent and taxes?"

In some previous adventures, we’ve talked about the value of a single farm.  We generally portray this as having a market value of about 50 koku, with enormous variation depending on how cash-rich or food-poor the domain is at any given time.  There is certainly some sense in which this must be true.  Sometimes freeholding farmers would buy or otherwise come to own their own bit of farmland outside of the main village fields and work them without needing to share or coordinate with the other villagers.  However, we’ve always portrayed this as the exception, and said that around 90% of farmers in Rokugan are tenant farmers whose landlords collect rent, pay taxes out of that rent, and keep what’s left over.

We have also portrayed the “tenant farms” as being individually owned by different entities, such that within a single village, many different merchants and samurai might own different farms as a source of revenue.  However, if large fields are subdivided and worked by different families in different years, then it’s probably not possible for a merchant house to own a single farm in the middle of the village.  Instead, they probably own large fields, and if that field is worked by a combination of 10 different households, then that merchant family would be said to own that field and have “authority over 10 households”.

In this scenario, it’s a little harder to track how rent is collected.  If individual farmers aren’t assigned specific farms, then how much do they owe?  The existing system is fine for computing the overall value, rent, and taxes associated with the village fields, but how is a merchant family supposed to figure out who specifically owes what amount of rent?

One possibility is that the village headsman tracks this as well.  If he’s doling out different parts of the fields, then he has enough information to either compute the associated rent, or pass along enough information to the merchant clerk for them to compute it.

Open questions:

This still leaves open a lot of questions, some of which I raised at the beginning of the document.  Here’s a partial list, along with some possible answers:

How is the village headsman chosen?
-> Presumably he is appointed by the county magistrate, with the understanding that the position is hereditary (see below).

How often is a new village headsman appointed?
-> I’m guessing this is rare, and usually only happens if the previous headsman dies or becomes otherwise ineligible. Unless the county magistrate becomes dissatisfied for some reason, this is probably a lifetime appointment.

Is this a hereditary position?
-> Generally yes.  We’ve portrayed Rokugan as a place where many positions are de facto hereditary even if in theory anyone could be appointed.  This seems like one of those cases.  Family and the continuation of traditional roles is highly valued.  With that being said, “It’s time for someone new” could easily happen if a new magistrate took issue with any previous problems in a village and blamed the headsman.

Is the village headsman necessarily a man?
-> Generally yes.  If the village headsman must necessarily receive ashigaru training, lead bandit hunting units of other ashigaru when bandits are reported, and possibly assume some kind of command posture over other ashigaru during wartime, then that implies the village headsman would almost always be a man.  However, one imagines that a husband and wife might share the headsman responsibilities, with the husband taking care of the martial duties, and the wife managing the bookkeeping.  Original L5R sometimes portrayed women as being more savvy about money and often managing household finances, so this would be in line with that.

Do hamlets have their own village headsman?
-> No, but with a caveat: a village district is, on average, probably about 15 square miles.  The village itself is a small fraction of this, probably only a few square miles, with the outlying hamlets each being miles away.  Overseeing all of this sounds time consuming enough that I wouldn’t expect someone to be able to do it “in their free time” while also personally working in their own fields.  However, if the headsman’s stipend (see the next question) and merchant gifts are enough to allow him (and perhaps his wife) to not need to personally spend all day farming, then a single headsman for the whole village district seems reasonable.  Presumably the village headsman still has a larger family which works land along with the rest of the village - we have previously portrayed the village headsman as still being themselves a farmer rather than some kind of educated clerk who spends all day doing paperwork.

How is the village headsman compensated?
-> Unlicensed ashigaru receive a stipend, and licensed ashigaru receive a much larger stipend.  Presumably the village headsman receives a large government stipend as well.  Though one imagines that merchant houses who own land in the village also give “generous” gifts to the village headsman, without whom they might have a difficult time collecting rent.  Working out the exact amount of this stipend might be kind of important.  If it’s a huge amount, I would expect other people in the village to covet this position and have real reason to try to make the magistrate dissatisfied with the existing headsman.  If it’s only 1-2 koku per year, then the position has more prestige than wealth.  It would also be useful to know “how much money is a meaningful amount to this person?”  Which is closely related to the classic question “how much does someone typically pay to bribe this person?”

What happens when two neighbors get into a dispute?
-> We’ve portrayed the village headsman as probably handling small disputes, and that peasants only bring cases before the county magistrate in extreme situations.  This probably fits even more with this set of headsman responsibilities (i.e. managing usufruct rights to the land) - if two farmers get into an argument over a fallen tree or something, then the headsman probably resolves it without needing to involve the county magistrate.  On the other hand, if fields belonging to two different merchant families are involved, the headsman might be more likely to escalate to the county magistrate (or rule in favor of whichever clerk gave him a larger gift).

Who is the village headsman actually loyal to?
-> The samurai presumably like to think that the headsman represents their interests.  The merchants presumably like to think their gifts are meaningful enough to keep him loyal to them.  The headman’s farming community neighbors presumably like to think that he’s one of them and does right by them.

This might be another reason to need to work out the headsman’s stipend.  One thing which makes this kind of question so difficult is that, based on the numbers above, the village produces ~400 koku worth of rent and ~800 koku worth of taxes every year.  With those kind of numbers, saying that the village headsman gets a 10 koku/year stipend isn’t crazy, and to some extent the samurai and merchants should probably be highly invested in making sure that this guy is paid well enough to care about staying in their good graces, have time to actually do the job well without worrying about his own farm, actually fill out paperwork, etc.

On the other hand, actual societies generally struggled to do any of that in a hierarchical and organized way (and paying someone a lot of money doesn’t necessarily make them loyal to you anyway), so maybe it’s all fairly informal.  Maybe the headsman gets paid like a 1 koku/year stipend, with another 1 koku gift from each large merchant house or samurai lineage which owns land in the village, and mostly is just another member of the peasant class who speaks on behalf of his neighbors who he actually cares about. 

Note that this emphasizes both both much thought we've put into the social hierarchy of Rokugan, but also how many open questions we have.





THE STRUCTURE OF ROKUGANI GOVERNMENT:

Now it might be worth talking a bit about the structure of Rokugan's civil and religious institutions.  One of the things I try to emphasize in my worldbuilding is the way in which Rokugan's religious doctrines, beliefs, and institutions still have to deal with the reality of politics and temporal power.

For example, a running theme is that in theory the Emperor's authority is supreme and that none would question or oppose the Emperor's wishes, but that in practice people have their own loyalties and incentives and which might sometimes run up against this.  And while it's extremely rare for someone to declare open rebellion against the Emperor's authority, people still find ways to work for their Clan or Family or House or Lineage insterests even if the Emperor would wand them to do otherwise.  Similarly, even if the Emperor would rather the Lion/Crane war not happen, it's rare that he would try to simply order an entire clan to cease military operations, lest he accidentally convince an entire clan that he is against them and sides with their enemies.

The original L5R sourcebooks make a few references to the Imperial government and the Imperial courts and such, but the details are mostly left vague.  This is usually fine, since most tabletop RPG adventures don't require either the players or GM to delve into the details of such things.  However, as I've been running L5R campaigns for over 20 years, I've found it useful to flesh out a lot of the details, since sometimes we do run adventures where the structure of Rokugani government is relevant, and where knowing who reports to whom or which ministers have what authority affects the choices and decisions which PCs and NPCs would make.

As I said, my own version of Rokugan does follow the basic structure from the original L5R source books, though we have made a few slight modifications and also greatly expanded the specificity of what ministries exist, how different people are appointed, etc.  In particular, since Rokugan at a high level is a fantasy setting whose culture is inspiried by Imperial Japan and whose geography is inspired by Imperial China, we drew some inspiration from the Ming Chinese system of the Six Ministries for fleshing out the specifics of Rokugan's government.

As explained above, Rokugan has 7 Great Clans, each of which has 3-5 Great Families.  Most of those Families have a ruling house and a number of vassal houses.

For example, one of my campaigns takes place in Damasu lands.  The Damasu are a vassal family to the Akodo family.  Thus, all Damasu samurai have the Akodo name, e.g. their previous daimyo was Akodo no Damasu Kojima.  Note that Akodo is the family name, "no Damasu" indicates that he is "of the Damasu" vassal house, and Kojima is his personal name.

There are 15 ranks of of the samurai caste in my version of Rokugan.  (This is more than in the published books, but we found that we needed more than the original 10 ranks to encompass all of the layers of government.)  The Emperor, of course, is of the Fifteenth Rank, which we would refer to in conversation as "rank 15".  A lowly samurai who has just passed their gempukku and not yet been assigned to a significant government post would be "of the First Rank" (which we in conversation would refer to as "a rank 1 samurai").

Here's a rough list of the ranks of extremely high-ranking people:

Rank 15: the Emperor (and no one else)

Rank 14: the Imperial Chancellor (usually from an Imperial family but currently Kakita Yoshi), and all 7 of the Clan daimyo (sometimes called the Clan Champions)

Rank 13: The ruling daimyo of the great Families, e.g. while Akoto Toturi is of the Fourteenth Rank due to being the daimyo of the whole Lion clan, Ikoma Tsanuri is of the Thirteenth Rank, as she is the daimyo over the entire Ikoma family but is subordinate to Akodo Toturi.  Imperial Ministers are also Rank 13.

Rank 12: a House daimyo, i.e. the daimyo of a vassal family of one of the Great Families, e.g. before his death Akodo no Damasu Kojima was of the Twelfth Rank.

Within a single House such as the Damasu (most domains are vassal domains, so this is a "typical" house), here is the typical rank structure:

Rank - Position
------------------
12 - Daimyo
11 - Chancellor
10 - Minister
9 - Deputy Minister
8 - Governor
7 - Provincial Minister
6 - Deputy Provincial Minister
5 - County Magistrate

I realize that this doesn't exactly follow the original published L5R books, but we tried to build on a combination of different historical settings and combined that with what was already established for Rokugan.

The Six Ministries exist at the Imperial level, the Clan level, the Family level, the House level, and at the provincial level (each House is divided in provinces, and the provincial government is divided into the Six Ministries as well).

In general, the Chancellary sets policy, and the Six Ministries implements policies.  At the Imperial level, the Imperial chancellary is composed of a chancellor from each House in the Empire.  However, not all chancellors are equal.  There are some matters where only the 7 Clan chancellors get a vote.  In other cases, all of the 29 Family chancellors from the 7 Clans get to vote, as well as the 4 Imperial Family chancellors from the Imperial families of the Hantei, Seppun, Otomo, and the Miya.  However, for most matters every chancellor from every House in the Empire gets to vote, which means that around 350 chancellors weigh in, which includes all of the vassal houses and minor clans.

Note that I am talking about "voting" as if this was a legislative body, though in theory the role of the Chancellary is supposedly to advise the Emperor, who makes all decisions.  However, there are two reasons why this is not true in practice.  First, with around 100 million human beings living in the Empire, the Emperor does not have time to weigh in on all decisions which come before the Chancellary.  Second, the Emperor's power is not as absolute in practice as their religious tradition claims it is, and therefore if the Chancellary overwhelmingly recommends a course of action to the Emperor, he is likely to approve it rather than impose his will upon his subjects on an unpopular manner that might offend his most powerful nobles.

With that being said, the Emperor still does weild considerable authority, and in any particular case he would almost certainly succeed if he defied the will of any particular clan or faction.  The Hantei dynasty does not make a habit of doing this, because it is preferable to cultivate the loyalty of all of his subjects over the centuries, so as to maintain the stability of their rulership, but occasionally it might be called for to take some drastic or unpopular action.

Thus, in practice the Imperial Ministers are tasked with implementing policies recommended to the Emperor (who mostly rubber stamps those recommendations in most circumstances), and those policies are set by the representatives from all of the daimyo of all of the major and minor clans and families of the Empire.

The Six Ministries are (in no particular order): the Ministry of Rites, the Ministry of Revenue, the Ministry of Retainers, the Ministry of War, the Ministry of Works, and the Ministry of Justice.

For each ministry, I will describe how it functions at the domain level, e.g. for a vassal family such as the Damasu, and then give some notes on the Imperial Ministery.

THE MINISTRY OF RITES:

In addition to overseeing shrines, temples, festivals, and the general ceremonies and religious obligations of the domain, the Ministry of Rites tracks births, marriages, and deaths of all the daimyo’s subjects, samurai and peasant alike. When a peasant moves from place to place, they are obligated to register with a local temple, who records where they have come from. Admittedly, this requirement is often “honored more in breach than observance”, and monks rarely make the effort to confirm that someone is who they say and come from the location they claim, except when they have reason to be suspicious of someone.

Every village district has a “country monk”, every county town has at least one “preceptor”, every provincial city has at least one “provincial abbot”, and every domain capital has at least two grand abbots. These shrines and temples are overseen by the Ministry of Rites, and the priests and monks who hold these positions therefore do work for the ministries, though they are typically peasants rather than samurai, who report to the samurai ministry officials who oversee them.

The Imperial Ministry of Rites is responsible for deciding which doctrines are accepted, which are open to debate, and which are declared heretical - while Clan, Family, House, and Provincial ministries of Rites may be tasked with enforcing these edicts, it is not for them to say which religious views do or don't constitute a heresy.  They also help the Emperor perform the most important rites and ceremonies throughout the year to help maintain the favor of the Fortunes and other kami.

THE MINISTRY OF REVENUE:

The Ministry of Revenue oversees the collection of land taxes, business license fees, import tariffs, etc. A minister of revenue has a certain tax obligation based on the holdings they oversee, and is required to supply that amount to their daimyo (or governor at the provincial level) every year. If they collect more than this amount, they may keep whatever is left over. In hard times when the daimyo’s subjects are unable to pay their taxes in full, the minister must make up the difference out of their own pocket, to ensure a reliable stream of revenue for their daimyo.  If the individual does not have enough to make of this difference, their lineage is expected to provide it, and if they cannot then this person is likely to lose their position to be replaced with someone with the foresight to save up for lean years.

This is also how things work for Governors and County Magistrates, and generally any kind of tax collection position or office which generates revenue.  Officials are expected to meet their obligations to the government, and when they do well they keep what is left over, and when they do poorly they must draw from their personal or family fortunes in order to ensure that the financial obligation is met.

At the Imperial level, the Ministry of Revenue oversees Imperial tax collection.  Consider a vassal domain such as the Wakashi house of the Ikoma family.  The Wakashi owe taxes to those above them, which come to:
-> 2% of their land tax revenue to the Ikoma family daimyo, Ikoma Tsanuri
-> 3% to the daimyo of the Lion clan, Akodo Toturi
-> 5% to the Emperor

The Ikoma Family Ministry of Revenue, the Lion Clan Ministry of Revenue, and the Imperial Ministry of Revenue all have representatives in the Wakashi domain to oversee this collection.  Although these numbers make up a relatively low percentage, they add up to quite a lot of wealth, and of course a domain such as the Wakashi have other obligations as well, such as fighting for their clan in times of war, and contributing lengionnaires to the Imperial legions, etc.

THE MINISTRY OF RETAINERS:

The Ministry of Retainers handles stipends and tracks the rank of all the daimyo’s samurai retainers. Administers civil service exams, and assesses candidates for promotions. For high-ranking positions (usually Governor or above and often County Magistrates due to the revenue associated with that position), the Ministry of Retainers will administer exams to eligible candidates, and then the Chancellary will select from a small pool of those who scored the highest.

Note that at the level of a domain, the House Chancellary is composed of representatives from the major lineages of a domain, generally 5-10.  I think I've explained the concept of a "lineage" before, but to review, samurai associate themselves with a notable ancestor who founded a lineage.  In some cases these lineages date back to the original warriors who swore fealty to the Great Ancestors and their retainers.  For example, after Daidoji swore fealty to Lady Doji at the dawn of the Empire, he helped conquer territory in her name.  A local warlord named Aki saw the wisdom in accepting the gifts of civilization offered by the Empire, so he swore fealty to Lord Daidoji.  To this day, the Aki lineage is a powerful faction of the ruling house of the Daidoji, and the Aki chancellor represents their interests on the Daidoji chancellary.

The Ministry of Retainers thus plays a key role in lineage politics and promotions.  When fleshing out the setting, I decided that I wanted civil service exams to be part of the structure of government (this is of course based on Imperial China rather than Imperial Japan), but we blended this with the samurai culture of Rokugan by making it common for the Minsitry of Retainers to submit the top applicants for a government post, at which point the House chancellary can vote.  In some cases positions will be awarded purely on merit, and in other cases there will be a lot of political deals and "horse-trading" and such.

At the Imperial level, the Imperial Ministry of Retainers performs this role for Imperial posts, and it also awards accolates, commendations, and other forms of Imperial recognition for those who need to be rewarded with various honors and titles outside of being granted government posts.  For example, Kitsuki Fu was recently awarded the Order of the Precious Crown for her service to the Emperor in the Forgotten Tomb, which is the highest commendation that can be awarded to anyone below the rank of daimyo.

THE MINISTRY OF WAR:

Ministers of war general the armies of their domains. They oversee the manufacture of weapons, armor, and other instruments of war. They maintain the stables and horses which are needed in wartime, and maintain maps of their land as well as their neighbors’ territories.

The Imperial Minister of War is also known as the Shogun.  All of the Imperial Ministers tend to have many titles, e.g. the Imperial Minister of Revenue is also known as the Imperial Treasurer, the Imperial Minister of Rites is also the High Priestess of Amaterasu, etc.

The Imperial Minister of War oversees the Imperial legions.  Some of these positions are largely ceremonial, though there are also over 20 legions stationed on the Kaiu Wall, assisting the Crab clan in their defense of the Empire against the Shadowlands.  The legionnares are largely drawn from the Clans, though the leadership of the legions are usually from Imperial families, especially the Seppun.

THE MINISTRY OF WORKS:

Here are the duties of the Ministry of Works: Overseeing the construction and maintenance of public works, such as roads, lighthouses, aqueducts, harbors, etc. This includes fortifications such as walls, moats, watchtowers, and other things which will be used in wartime. It usually includes the construction of other public buildings used by other ministries such as granaries. Shrines and temples are usually the responsibility of the Ministry of Rites.

Ministries of works are given a budget and then expected to meet their construction and maintenance obligations. If they come in under budget, they are able to keep the excess – when things go over budget they are expected to make up the difference out of pocket. This is how budgeting works generally for all government posts in Rokugan, and thus Minister of Works can be a position almost as lucrative as the Ministry of Revenue, though in cases of large budget overruns a Minister of Works might need to tap into their lineage's family fortunes in order to avoid the humiliation of failing to complete a project.

This system means that a lot of behaviors which in a modern society would describe as "embezzlement" (or theft or other forms of misappropriation) are actually just Rokugan working as expected.  If a government official manages to negotiate a good deal on some raw materials, they pocket the extra money and everyone knows that's how things work.  This is not just true for those in charge at the top, but also for people in charge of smaller departments within the Minsitry.  For example, someone in the Ministry of Works for Damasu lands is tasked with specifically purchasing and transporting stone from Asako quarries to the city of Toshi Ranbo to improve its fortifications.  That person has been allocated a budget based on estimates of how much such things have cost in the past and are likely to cost, and if he can manage to negotiate for less or find a way to transport the stone more cheaply, then he could make himself quite rich as a result.

This kind of thing is especially true in the Ministry of Works, but it also applies to other Ministries as well, when officials are given a budget.  For example, consider how many things need to be purchased by Ministry of War to maintain its military readiness: food, animal feed, horses, weapons, armor, etc.  This system of budgeting applies almost everywhere and to almost all government posts in Rokugan at every level.

At the Imperial level, in addition to performing these kinds of usual duties for the capital city of Otosan Uchi the Ministry of Works contributes significantly to the upkeep of the Kaiu Wall protecting the Empire from the Shadowlands, and also the construction, maintenance, and staffing of waystations on the Imperial roads.  There are over 50,000 miles of Imperial roads in the Empire, and many of them have a waystation staffed at every mile to protect against bandits and maintain law and order for travelers.

THE MINISTRY OF JUSTICE:

The Ministry of Justice oversees street policing, bandit patrols, magistrates, courts, jails, and other aspects of both the civil and criminal justice systems.

At the Imperial level, the Imperial Minister of Justice is also known as the Emerald Champion, and is chosen through the Test of the Emerald Champion, a tournament in which the best duelsts from all over Rokugan compete - the intention is that the Emerald Champion be the best duelist in the Empire, because this is the person who duels on behalf of the Emperor himself.

Such duels were more common early in the Empire, when the Emperor's authority was less respected.  However, even in modern times, an Emerald Champion might travel to places where a dispute is causing headaches for the Emperor and "go fishing for a duel".  While neither party in a dispute would openly challenge the Emperor's authority, the Emerald Champion might make a personal determination about who is in the wrong, and then proceed to berate that side savagely, putting them in a position where they must either submit to the judgment of the Imperial Ministery of Justice or lose a tremendous amount of face... or challenge the Emerald Champion to a duel.  And since the Emerald Champion is the greatest duelist in the Empire, this option is a last resort, and the Emperor is thus able to influence disputes without needing to personally intervene or make rulings.

Every domain in the Empire has an Imperial magistrate whose duties are outlined in the Emerald Charter.  The Imperial magistrate also oversees tax collection for the Imperial Ministry of Revenue, coordinates the recuitment of troops for the Imperial legions on behalf of the Imperial Ministry of War, etc.  In order to perform all of these duties, Imperial Magistrates have a large staff of Imperial yoriki ("assistants").

This is not only true at the Imperial level, but at the Clan and Family level as well.  Consider the Wakashi domain of the Ikoma family.  Shiro Wakashi, their capital has:

-> an Imperial Magistrate, whose duties I described above
-> an Ikoma Family magistrate, who oversees Ikoma family tax collection and manages Family disputes
-> a Lion Clan magistrate from the Akodo family, who oversees Lionm clan tax collection and manages clan disputes

Consider when two samurai in the Wakashi domain become embroiled in a legal dispute:
-> if both samurai are from the Wakashi house, then it is a local matter, and handled by the Wakashi Ministry of Justice
-> if the samurai are from different houses of the Ikoma family, then the Ikoma Family magistrate hears the dispute
-> if the samurai are from different families of the Lion clan, such as a Matsu having a dispute with an Ikoma, then the Lion Clan magistrate handles the dispute
-> if the samurai are from different clans, then the Imperial magistrate handles the dispute

Accounting for these different types of disputes are why every domain has magistrates representing all of these different levels.  However, such magistrates are always stationed in the domain's capital, so two people having a dispute out in the provinces of the Wakashi domain would need to travel to Shiro Wakashi in order to have their case heard.





SAMURAI LINEAGES:

Every samurai retainer belongs to a noble lineage.  These are not simply bloodlines, but well-defined political coalitions.  Each lineage whose population makes up at least 10% of the samurai in the domain generally has a representative on the house Chancellary, which sets policy through its advice given to the daimyo.  The "ruling" lineage bears the name of the house, e.g. the Wakashi house is ruled by a daimyo from the Wakashi lineage, and one of the daimyo's close family members (often a spouse or sibling or child) will be the Wakashi chancellor.

As an example, let's consider the Ryusei domain of the Mirumoto family of the Dragon clan.  The Ryusei domain is a roughly-average-sized House with a population of about 4,200 samurai out of a total of 210,000 humans (remember that the median domain has 5,00 samurai out of 250,000 humans, so this is a fairly typical domain).

The Ryusei House Chancellary is comprised of representatives from its six largest lineages, which collectively make up almost 90% of the domain. The ruling lineage (i.e. the daimyo’s lineage) is the Ryusei lineage, and it and the others are listed below:

Lineage	    Chancellor	                Governors and Magistrates	Ministry Officials	    % of Domain
Ryusei	    Mirumoto no Ryusei Maino	4	                        11	                    17%
Isa	        Mirumoto no Ryusei Saharu	5	                        12	                    16%
Sasara	    Mirumoto no Ryusei Kazuchi	2	                        12	                    16%
Moe	        Mirumoto no Ryusei Yumiyo	9	                        13	                    15%
Tokino	    Mirumoto no Ryusei Biei	    4	                        9	                    14%
Joji	    Mirumoto no Ryusei Kyono	7	                        9	                    11%

There are three smaller lineages which make up most of the rest of the remaining samurai in the domain: the Shun, the Meguri, and the Noa.

Of the lineages mentioned, three are significant for not having originally been part of the Ryusei House: the Isa, the Joji, and the Meguri. They were originally made up Mirumoto samurai displaced by the return of the Unicorn.

Here’s a breakdown of how many ministers and deputy ministers at the domain and provincial level each Ryusei lineage has in each ministry:

Lineage	    Works	Justice	    Retainers	Rites	Revenue	    War
Ryusei	    1	    4	        2	        0	    3	        1
Isa	        3	    0	        1	        2	    2	        4
Sasara	    2	    1	        1	        5	    1	        3
Moe	        4	    3	        1	        2	    2	        1
Tokino	    0	    2	        2	        1	    2	        2
Joji	    2	    2	        2	        1	    1	        1

Note that these numbers reflect the nature and character of the lineages, as is usually the case for most domains.  Some examples:

-> The Moe lineage is the most commercial, and has the most connection to merchants, as reflected by how they pursue the high-profit stations of Governor and County Magistrate and prioritize seeking positions in the lucrative ministries of Works and Revenue.  Moe samurai are often trained as samurai merchants for this reason.

-> The Sasara lineage is the most pious, and is so religiously observant that they focus on obtaining positions in the Ministry of Rites.  However, they have recently lost many county magistrate positions and currently have no governors, because their religious zeal caused them to align with a new religious movement (the Baitenist movement) to a degree that many officials were stripped of their positions after allowing tenant farmers to leave their lands in mass numbers.

-> The Isa lineage is the most warlike, to a degree which is expected for members of their bloodline but unusual for Dragon clan samurai from Mirumoto houses such as the Ryusei.  We can see their "bloodthirsty" nature reflected in their pursuit of positions within the Ministry of War.

Provinces:

House Ryusei has five provinces, which are listed below, along with their governor, the lineage of their governor, and the number of counties.

Province	Governor	                    Counties
Honshu	    Mirumoto no Ryusei Fumiyuki	    5
Kansai	    Mirumoto no Ryusei Reishi	    6
Maebashi	Mirumoto no Ryusei Seitaro	    7
Nagano	    Mirumoto no Ryusei Urumi	    7
Yokohama	Mirumoto no Ryusei Yayoi	    4

Note that in Ryusei lands, all of the lineages are "cosmopolitan lineages" and there are no "provincial lineages" or "dynasty provinces".  To define these terms:

-> Sometimes a province will be staffed almost entirely by members of a specific lineage, whose samurai mostly live there.  This often happens when the geographic area of this province is the home of those samurai from long ago.  For example, the Aki lineage in Daidoji lands is from the province and provincial city of Akishi.

-> Therefore, the Aki are a "provincial lineage".

-> The Aki province of Akishi is a "dynasty province".

-> All of the Ryusei provinces are assigned governors and other officials by the Ryusei chancellary, and therefore these are known as "stewardship provinces".

-> Because none of the Ryusei lineages are tied to any specific province, they are all known as "cosmopolitan lineages".

Geography:

The Ryusei domain is the westernmost Mirumoto House. Dragon lands are to its east and northeast, with mostly uninhabited mountains to the north. Ryusei lands border the Unicorn clan on the west, and the Lion clan on the south.

The Natsune are the Shinjo domain in the Unicorn clan lands bordering the Ryusei directly to the west.

The Wakashi are the Ikoma domain in the Lion clan lands bordering the Ryusei directly to the south.

The Fuseo are the Mirumoto domain in the other Dragon clan lands bordering the Ryusei directly to the east.

TAKEAWAYS:

I've listed Ryusei domain information here because is an example of a specific domain which is reasonably close to "the median domain", but with actual numbers and officials attached.





ROKUGAN'S CALENDAR:

First of all, because Rokugan is not a real place on earth and has a different cosmology, we have given it a 360 day solar year.  This avoids us needing to worry about months of different lengths or leap years or interregnum days or anything complicated like that.

Second, each month is a 30 day lunar month, and the lunar cycle is exactly 30 days, with the full moon falling in the middle of each month and the new moon happening at the beginning/end of each month.  This makes the lunar cycle easy to keep track of alongside the calendar.  It also reinforces the centrality of the sun and moon in the Rokugani cosmology.

The months of the Rokugani calendar do not exactly line up with our own.  The 1st day of the Rokugani year is the 1st day of spring, which puts it at what we would think of as the end of February.

Here are the Twelve Months of the Rokugani Year
N / Zodiac / Traditional Name of the Month / equivalent Gregorian Month
1 / Hare / Mutsuki (affection) / February
2  / Dragon / Kisaragi (changing) / March
3 / Serpent / Yayoi (new life) / April
4 / Horse / Uzuki (unohana month) / May
5 / Goat / Satsuki (sprout-planting month) / June
6 / Monkey / Minatsuki (waterless month) / July
7 / Rooster / Fumizuki (poetry month) / August
8 / Dog / Hazuki (leaf month) / September
9 / Boar / Nagatsuki (long month) / October
10 / Rat / Kaminazuki (month of the gods) / November
11 / Ox / Shimotsuki (frost month) / December
12 / Tiger / Shiwasu (priests running) / January

The months were divided into three periods of roughly 10 days each. These periods were called jun.
They were the upper jun, the middle jun, and the lower jun (joujun, chuujun, and gejun).

The last day of each month is called misoka. The last day of the year is the great misoka, or oomisoka.

The Sexagenary Cycle of 60 years names each year by a combination of one each of the Ten Heavenly Stems and the Twelve Earthly Branches. Each year is a different Earthly Branch (the familiar zodiac animals), while the Heavenly Stem only change every twelve years, after a cycle of the earthly branches.

For example, the first year is the year of the Yang Wood Rat, then the year of the Yang Wood Ox, and
so on until the Yang Wood Boar, then the Heavenly Stem changes so the next year is the year of the Yin Wood Rat, and so on.

This cycle is also used to identify the day.

Ten Heavenly Stems:
1 ko/kinoe Yang Wood
2 otsu/kinoto Yin Wood
3 hei/hinoe Yang Fire
4 tei/hinoto Yin Fire
5 bo/tsuchinoe Yang Earth
6 ki/tsuchinoto Yin Earth
7 kou/kanoe Yang Metal
8 shin/kanoto Yin Metal
9 jin/mizunoe Yang Water
10 ki/mizunoto Yin Water

Twelve Earthly Branches:
1 shi/ne Rat
2 chuu/ushi Ox
3 in/tora Tiger
4 bou/u Hare
5 shin/tatsu Dragon
6 shi/mi Snake
7 go/uma Horse
8 mi/hitsuji Sheep
9 shin/saru Monkey
10 yuu/tori Rooster
11 jutsu/inu Dog
12 gai/i Boar

12 Hours of the Day
An “hour” in the traditional Rokugani system is a twelfth of a day, or two hours. The twelve hours of the day use the Twelve Earthly Branches.
Hare 0600 - 0800
Dragon 0800 - 1000
Serpent 1000 - 1200
Horse 1200 - 1400
Goat 1400 - 1600
Monkey 1600 - 1800
Rooster 1800 - 2000
Dog 2000 - 2200
Boar 2200 - 0000
Rat 0000 - 0200
Ox 0200 - 0400
Tiger 0400 - 0600

This is all based on historical Chinese calendar that the Japanese Imperial Court adopted in the seventh century C.E. though obviously some modifications have been made.

Before diving into the calendar, it is helpful to give a “big picture” of the planting and harvest seasons
for the major crops.

The staples of Rokugan are the Five Grains: rice, wheat or barley, soybeans, sweet red azuki beans,
and millet. Of these, rice occupies the central place. Taxes are calculated mainly based on rice, money was originally backed by rice, and the domain of a daimyo is measured not in people or in land area, but in average annual rice production. Soybeans are second in importance, providing not only a valuable source of protein and vegetable fat, but also playing a vital role in rice farming as a nitrogen fixer that renews the soil of the rice fields. Azuki beans also play both roles as a nutritious food and a nitrogen fixer, but are less useful and less prominent than soybeans. Wheat, barley, and millet are sometimes raised as aftercrops, but they primarily are raised as the least worse choice for farmers who cannot grow rice because their land is too dry or their regional climate is too cold.

Besides the Five Grains, people raise many vegetables, such as daikon radish, kabu turnips, uri melons, nasu eggplants, greens, and various fruits. Cash crops like tea, tobacco, hemp, indigo, nanohana rape flowers, and others tend to be specialties of the regions suited to their cultivation.

Silk also deserves special attention. Silk is the product of weaving thread made from the cocoons of
silkworms. Silkworms exclusively eat the leaves of varieties of kuwa mulberry trees, so silk weavers must grow mulberry orchards to support the practice. In many cases, farming families farm cereal grains as well as cultivating silk. Silk production is heavily gendered, traditionally the exclusive domain of women.

Farming practices vary according to regional climate, regional rainfall, the terrain of an individual
family's fields.

Temperate regions are well mapped to the traditional calendar. In this kind of climate, farmers can
grow a single crop of rice with an aftercrop. On well-watered land (in valleys or near rivers), farmers can grow a single crop of rice followed by an aftercrop of barley, autumn wheat, or autumn soybeans. Farmers with drier land grow spring wheat followed by an aftercrop of millet or autumn soybeans.
Southern regions have shorter winters, warmer summers, and more rainfall. Options unique to warmer southern regions include double cropping rice and aftercropping summer millet and azuki beans. Double crop rice is only possible for farmers who have very well watered lands, such as river deltas. Farmers who double crop rice must alternate to replenish the land in some years by single cropping rice with an autumn soybean or azuki bean aftercrop. Most farmers in warm regions do not have enough water to double crop rice, however, so they single crop rice with an aftercrop. Southern farmers with dry land can grow spring wheat with an aftercrop of summer millet, autumn soybeans, or azuki beans.

Cold and dry regions in the north cannot reliably grow rice or autumn soybeans because of the likelihood of late frost and drought. Cold regions also have fewer options for aftercrops, since azuki beans and autumn soybeans cannot mature before freezing weather begins. Cold region farmers grow crops with shorter growing seasons and less need for water, namely winter wheat, spring barley, millet, and summer soybeans. One common rotation is spring barley or summer soybeans with an aftercrop of winter wheat.

As I explained before, the Rokugani solar year is 360 days, with 30-day lunar cycles. We have set the calendar in this way to allow for consistent, predictable lunar months, without the hassle of intercalation. This also means that the zodiacal cycle of 12 days is predictable, with the first day of the year falling on a Day of the Rat, the last day of the year falling on a Day of the Boar, and every other day similarly fixed the same each year.

The Rokugani calendar is divided into twelve lunar months of 30 days each. The month begins with the new moon, and the full moon occurs on the 15th day of each month. Each month has a seasonal or
agricultural connotation fixed to the climate and ritual holidays of that month. In addition, each month is also aligned to a zodiacal sign. The Rokugani year begins in the spring. In Rokugan, the seasons are
centered on the equinoxes and solstices, rather than beginning and ending on the equinoxes and solstices – for example, the Vernal Equinox occurs in the middle of the second month of spring, instead of at the beginning of spring. This means that the Rokugani spring begins in a cold and potentially snowy time of year.

The most important festival days tend to occur on the 15th days of months and on “double odd” days,
such as the first day of the first month, the third day of the third month, and so on. Each month also brings its seasonal flowers and colors. This manifests itself in many ways, especially in poetry, clothing, and decorations.

Here's a breakdown of the 1st month of the Rokugani calendar.  This description lists the real-world calendar days which are roughly equivalent to the days on the Rokugani calendar, to help the reader account for the fact that the 1st day of the Rokugani year is the first day of spring, which represents a considerable offset from our own calendar.

1st Month: Mutsuki (“affection month”), Month of the Hare
4 February – 5 March
Seasonal color: Red blossom plum combination (crimson and purple)
Flowers of Spring: tsubaki camelia, aomugi green barley, sumire violets, harunokusa spring grasses and herbs, tanpopo dandelions, seri dropwort, yomogi mugwort, wakame seaweed
Flowers of Mutsuki: ume plum, kobai red plum, shitamoe and kusanome sprouting grass and flowers, Norine seaweed

The first month is called the “month of affection” or “friendly month” because of the tradition of paying respects to one's superiors and gathering with friends and family during the New Year's holidays. The New Year's festival of Oshogatsu (“first month”) fills the first fifteen days of the first month. It's considered unlucky to cook during Oshogatsu (there is a taboo on the kitchen), so people eat a variety of special foods prepared in the previous month, such as rice cakes, roasted chestnuts, dried fish, and pickles beyond count.

Many of the “firsts” of the year are special – the first visit to a shrine, the first snow, the first flowers, the first martial arts practice, and so on. Typically, people participate as a group, in varying degrees of formality, to do their “firsts” together.

1st Day (4 Feb): Risshun (first day of spring)
In the solar calendar, Risshun marks the first day of spring.

The first day of the year begins with rituals and ends with a festival. The Emperor and daimyo begin the day with the ceremony of Shihohai (Prayer to the Four Directions), and nobles and vassals participate in Kochohai (Lesser Obeisance), paying respects to their lords and masters.

On the night of Risshun, people gather outside to enjoy parades, fireworks, music, and hot sweet sake.

The Emperor and daimyo also partake of the Okusuri and Hagatame (Medicine Offerings and Tooth Hardening) ceremonies for the first three days of the year, drinking wine spiced with special herbs and eating yang foods such as radishes, mirror-shaped rice cakes, and melon, to fortify their health for the year.

Risshun is also the day when all Rokugani count themselves one year older. Significant ages such as adulthood (genpaku), 60, and 80 are celebrated on this day.

5th Day: Joui (Bestowal of ranks)
On the fifth day, new ranks are bestowed to those who have been promoted. Nobles gather in the Imperial Court, vassals gather in the castles of their daimyo, and clerks gather in the parlors of merchant families. After new ranks are bestowed, the gatherings pass a cup of wine to toast their congratulations.

For samurai and nobles, a new rank may mean new living quarters, new clothing, and other coveted benefits.

For farmers, laborers, and eta, this is a day to pay one's respects to one's new superiors with effusive congratulations and gifts.

7th Day (10 Feb): Wakana no sekku or Nanakusa no sekku (Festival of Young Herbs)

Nanakusa no sekku is one of the five Gosechi holidays.

On the seventh day, people gather the seven auspicious herbs (seri water dropwort, nazuna shepherd's purse, gogyo cudweed, hakobera chickweed, hotokenoza nipplewort, suzuna turnip, and suzushiro daikon radish) and prepare them in a special soup with stewed rice cakes. These herbs are wild edible herbs of early spring, and they may be the first fresh vegetables eaten after a long winter of pickles and dried fruit.

In the Imperial Court and the castles of daimyo, this day includes a special excursion to pick the seven herbs. Peasant villages are also likely to pick the herbs. Townspeople may have to pick the herbs ahead of time, or buy them in shops.

The Imperial Court also celebrates the Aouma no Sekki (Ceremony of Blue Horses) on this day, with a parade of auspicious “blue” gray horses from the Imperial stables. Horses are yang animals, and blue horses are especially yang. This promotes good health and good fortune for the coming year.
Pine decorations are placed in households. In some homes, a pine tree is erected in the courtyard or in front of the house. The pine is auspicious and yang because it is an evergreen.

15th Day: Mochigayu (Full Moon Porridge)
The fifteenth day is the first full moon of the New Year, and the last day of Oshogatsu (New Year's). Rice porridge is prepared and stirred with sticks of peeled elder wood. Women who hope to conceive a male child this year are struck on the loins with the stick after it is used to stir the gruel.

After eating the porridge, families burn their New Year's decorations (the pine tree, paper money, paper flowers, paper horses, etc.). The kami who spent New Year's in the home rise with the smoke to return to the mountains and fields.

16th Day (19 Feb): Usui (rainwater)
In the solar calendar, Usui marks the time when the climate is warming, and it is more likely to rain than to snow.

The Imperial Court also holds Tooka no Sechie (The Festival of Poetry Dances) on the sixteenth day. Nobles recite poetry in honor of the spring, perhaps incorporating inside jokes from the events of the recent Oshogatsu. After the poetry, elaborate court dances are held.

Exceptionally wealthy merchants and particularly decadent daimyo might ape the court celebration of the Poetry Dances, but most ordinary people will mark this day with nothing more than an impromptu poem or song.

18th Day: Noriyumi (Bowman's Wager)
On the eighteenth day, the Imperial Palace holds an archery competition between the Inner Palace Guards and the Outer Palace Guards. The losing side drinks the cup of defeat, and the occasion is topped off with a banquet. This occasion may be proper or decadent depending on the virtue of the Imperial Court and the discipline of the guards.  The Bowman's Wager competition is also held in other contexts - it was recently used to decide some important matters in the peace treaty negotions between the Lion and Crane as they negotiated the end of the Lion/Crane war, and local cities often hold Bowman's Wager competitions to test the skill of their own archers.

30th Day (5 Mar): Keichitsu (insects awaken)
In the solar calendar, Keichitsu (insects awaken) marks the time when it is warm enough that hibernating insects have begun to emerge from the earth and trees.

2nd Month: Kisaragi (“changing”), Month of the Dragon
6 March – 4 April
Seasonal color: Peach combination (peach and khaki)
Flowers of Spring: tsubaki camelia, aomugi green barley, sumire violets, harunokusa spring grasses and herbs, tanpopo dandelions, seri dropwort, yomogi mugwort, wakame seaweed
Flowers of Kisaragi: sakura early cherry blossoms, konome tree buds, ryuujo willow fluff, tsukushi horsetail, warabi fiddlehead fern, shunran spring orchid, tsubana reed ears, mukusa waterweeds, ashinotsuno reed sprouts

The second month is called the “month of changing” because nature is changing into the bright colors of new leaves and flowers, and people are changing into lighter clothes.

4th Day: Kinensai (Spring Prayers)
On the fourth day of the second month, the governmental Ministries of Rites hold rituals and prayers to call the Rice God down from the hills and pray for good crops. Farmers hold similar rituals.

11th Day: Rekken (Examinations)
On the eleventh day of the second month, at the Imperial Court, nobles selected for promotion from the Sixth Rank wear garlands of flowers and proceed to be formally examined by the top ministers of the government. Their names are entered into the rolls of officials of the Fifth Rank, and they join their new ministers for the three-by-three exchange of wine cups.

12th Day (18 Mar): Haru Higan (Haru Higan festival)
The twelfth day of the second month marks the beginning of the Haru Higan festival, a seven-day Shinseist festival centered on the Vernal Equinox. Families visit the graves of their ancestors, weed and clean the graves, and make offerings of flowers, incense, and rice balls. During this time, monks chant the canon of Shinseist sutras, and services are held every day at temples. Many people attend midday temple services every day during Haru Higan.

15th Day (20 Mar): Shunbun (Vernal Equinox)
The fifteenth day of the second month is Shunbun, the Vernal Equinox, the halfway point of Spring.

18th Day: End of Haru Higan
The eighteenth day of the second month is the last day of the Haru Higan spring festival. Even if daily temple services are inconvenient, almost everybody attends a temple service on this final day of the festival.

3rd Month: Yayoi (“new life”), Month of the Serpent
5 April – 5 May
Seasonal color: Cherry combination (white and burgundy)
Flowers of Spring: tsubaki camelia, aomugi green barley, sumire violets, harunokusa spring grasses and herbs, tanpopo dandelions, seri dropwort, yomogi mugwort, wakame seaweed
Flowers of Yayoi: sakura cherry, tsutsuji azalea, fuji wisteria, yamabuki mountain rose, momo peach, wakamidori young green plants, kuwa mulberry, yanagi willow, takenoaki “bamboo autumn,” nanohana rape flowers, daikon radish, mame beans, genge vetch, sakurasoo primrose, shibazakura phlox

The third month is called “Yayoi” because of the profusion of flowers and new growth in the natural world. The star of Yayoi is the sakura, or cherry, which blooms for a brief two weeks before falling away. Hanami flower-viewing parties to see the cherry blossoms and the other beauties of Yayoi are near-universal. Clothing invariably incorporates the white and red colors of the cherries.
Yayoi is also when farmers begin to plant rice in single-cropping regions of Rokugan. This is also the month to plant spring wheat and summer soybeans. (Summer soybeans are preferred in both southern and northern climates; they are a short season crop with a long flowering period.)
In contrast to the many blooming flowers, Yayoi is the time of “bamboo autumn,” when most species of bamboo shed their leaves. The bamboo leaves turn yellow, and fall in the next month, before growing back anew.

1st Day (5 Apr): Seimei (clear and bright)
In the solar calendar, seimei marks a period of spring when the weather is usually sunny and cloudless.

3rd Day (7 Apr): Hinamatsuri (Doll Festival) or Momo no sekku (Peach Festival), and Gotou (Holy Light)
Momo no sekku, or Hinamatsuri, is one of the five Gosechi holidays. It is called the Peach Festival because the peach blossoms are in bloom, but it is more commonly known as the Doll Festival because of the use of dolls for ritual purification. The Holy Light observance centers around lighting candles.
On the third day of the third month, people use straw dolls for ritual purification ceremonies. The dolls are ritually linked to the person through writing the person's name, birthdate, and guardian star on the doll, and rituals are performs to transfer evil spirits and impurities to the doll. The dolls are thrown into rivers and oceans to carry away the bad fortune.
In a more modern custom, families with daughters make a decorative display of dolls in their home to bring good fortune for their daughters. The characteristics and positioning of the dolls is rigidly prescribed, but dolls can be simple or very ornate. Wealthy families have lavishly appointed displays of dolls.
Momo no sekku is an auspicious time for medicine hunts (kusagari), expeditions to search for special herbs and minerals that promote longevity and good health. Mugwort is a particularly important herb, since it can be burned to dispel evil spirits. Medicine hunts are mainly done by servants (on behalf of their masters), doctors, apothecaries, shugenja, diviners, tsukai, and Bloodspeakers.
Momo no sekku is also important for the silk industry, because it is the time when women begin feeding mulberry leaves to newly hatched silkwork larvae.
That night, the Emperor lights a candle and prays to the North Star for protection. Ordinary people join in the lighting of candles, and men and women dance together. Music, dancing, and sake are typical. In ancient times, Gotou festivals devolved into orgies.
The Hinamatsuri and Gotou are a particularly important time for maho. Tsukai and Bloodspeakers use the purification ceremony to help control the onset of the Shadowlands Taint. They also use corrupted versions of the purification ceremonies for some maho rituals. Bloodspeakers gain special power over a person if they can acquire the straw doll used for the day's purification ceremony.

13th Day (17 Apr): Haru no douyou (preparing the ground for spring)
The thirteenth day of the third month is haru no douyou, marking them time when farmers must begin plant rice.

16th Day (20 Apr): Kokuu (grain rain)
In the solar calendar, kokuu marks the waning of spring and the time when farmers need rain to nourish the rice that they have planted this month.

28th Day (2 May): Hachijuuhachiya (88 nights since spring)
Hachijuuhachiya marks the time when new planted rice is safe from even the most freakish spring frost.

That takes us to the end of spring.

I will describe the summer months next:

4th Month: Uzuki (“unohana” or “deutzia”), Month of the Horse
6 May – 5 June
Seasonal color: Orange flower combination (deadleaf yellow and purple)
Flowers of Summer: aogiri phoenix tree, natsukusa summer grasses and herbs, aoashi green reeds, mugura burweed, makomo water oats, ukikusa duckweed
Flowers of Uzuki: botan peony, wakakaede young maple leaves, tokiwagi ochiba fallen evergreen leaves, unohana deutzia flower, ibara multiflora rose, kiri pawlonia, takeochiba fallen bamboo leaves, yuri lily, takenoko bamboo shoots, fuki buterburr, mugi barley

The fourth month is called the “unohana month” for the unohana flower, or deutzia, that blooms seasonally. Summer begins in the fourth month.
Uzuki is an even-numbered month when people are busy with farming, so it has a relatively clear calendar. However, there are many flowers and plants to enjoy in this month, and people acutely aware of the approaching rainy season will make time to enjoy nature.
Uzuki is also the month for harvesting winter wheat and picking tea leaves, and the time for harvesting winter barley in temperate areas.

1st Day: Rikka (first day of summer)
In the solar calendar, Rikka is the first day of summer.
The first day of the fourth month marks the beginning of summer. People change to single-layer kimono and put aside the flowers and colors of spring.

7th Day: Aoi Matsuri (Hollyhock Festival)
The seventh day of the fourth month is the Hollyhock Festival, which includes displays of horseback archery (yabusame) and the ritual appointment and procession of the chief priestess of an important shrine.

17th Day: Shouman (grain full)
In the solar calendar, shouman marks a time when barleycorns should be full and plump.

5th Month: Satsuki (“sprout”), Month of the Goat
6 June – 6 July
Seasonal color: Artemisia combination (sprout green and yellow)
Flowers of Summer: aogiri phoenix tree, natsukusa summer grasses and herbs, aoashi green reeds, mugura burweed, makomo water oats, ukikusa duckweed
Flowers of Satsuki: tachibana mandarin orange, aoume green plum fruits, kakitsubata blue flag iris, ayame wild iris, shaobu Japanese iris, sanae young rice plants

Satsuki, the “sprout month,” is the time when new rice plants begin to sprout. It is also the beginning of the rainy season, when torrential rains fill rice paddies and overflood riverbanks. The significant Iris Festival is held in this month.
In the latter half of the month, women begin harvesting silk cocoons. After harvesting, women will gather in workshops or family groups to boil the cocoons and spin them into thread. In the cottage industry, weaving is done mainly in the winter, but in shops and in more ambitious families, weaving is done year round, sometimes even through the night.
Satsuki is also the time for harvesting winter barley in the northernmost areas of Rokugan, and the beginning of harvest for the early rice crop in double cropping areas in years with good weather.

1st Day (6 Jun): Houshu (grain in ear)
In the solar calendar, Houshu marks the time when wheat and barley should be in ear.

5th Day (10 Jun): Ayame no sekku (Iris Festival)
Ayame no sekku is one of the five Gosechi festivals.
The fifth day of the fifth month is the Iris Festival. On this day, yin energy empowers vicious evil spirits to roam the land and harm the people. The Iris Festival was created to combat these spirits with yang events of horse racing and archery competitions. People also wear amulets woven from five colors of silk threads in special ritual patterns to ward off evil influences and promote good yang energies. At the close of the festival, palace guards, samurai, and priests twang bowstrings to frighten away evil spirits. Purification rituals using scapegoat dolls, like the ritual performed on the Doll Festival, are also performed during the Iris Festival, but they are not as central to the day's events. Medicine hunts for mugwort and other beneficial herbs are also common during the Iris Festival.
The Iris Festival is named for the various iris flowers seasonal to this time. Irises are used in decorations, herbal sake, and pillows, and in particular, people wear iris garlands in their hair. The Imperial Court holds iris contests, in which the court ladies enter pairs of iris roots, with accompanying poems, to be judged for beauty, style, and uniqueness. The ladies and their attendants may spend days in advance searching for fine specimens of lotus root for the contest.
The Iris Festival is also the first day when women begin gathering silk cocoons for making silk.
For tsukai and Bloodspeakers, the Iris Festival is a powerful time for summoning oni and raising the spirits of the dead.

6th Day (11 Jun): Nyuubai (beginning of rainy season)
The sixth day of the fifth month traditionally begins the rainy season. Most people carry umbrellas and straw capes for the next month to fend off frequent, sudden, torrential rainstorms.

10th Day: Shinkou (Imperial Alms)
From the tenth to the thirtieth day of the fifth month, the Emperor and daimyo distribute alms of rice and salt throughout the land. This practice is restrained in years of plenty, and more liberal in years of famine or other trouble.

16th Day (21 Jun): Geshi (Summer Solstice)
In the solar calendar, the fifteenth day of the fifth month is the Summer Solstice, the longest day of the year.

26th Day (2 Jul): Hangesho (5-day break from farming)
On the twenty-sixth day of the fifth month, farmers in many regions observe Hangesho, a five-day break from the backbreaking work of farming.

6th Month: Minazuki (“dry”), Month of the Monkey
7 July – 7 August
Seasonal color: Lily combination (red and deadleaf yellow)
Flowers of Summer: aogiri phoenix tree, natsukusa summer grasses and herbs, aoashi green reeds, mugura burweed, makomo water oats, ukikusa duckweed
Flowers of Minazuki: himawari sunflower, nadeshiko pinks, yuugao moonflowers, uri melon, nasu eggplant, hasu lotus, kusaikire rank-smelling weeds

Minazuki, the “dry month,” brings the end of the rainy season and the beginning of summer heat.
Late Minazuki is the beginning of the harvests for spring wheat and summer soybeans. In temperate areas, farmers begin to plant autumn soybeans in Minazuki or as late as next month. (Autumn soybeans are a longer season crop preferred in temperate climates; they have a short flowering season and they tend to grow as vines.) Minazuki is also the time for harvesting early rice in double cropping areas, in good weather years.

1st Day (7 Jul): Shousho (lesser heat)
In the solar calendar, Shoushou is the beginning of summer heat.

14th Day (20 Jul):    Natsu no douyou (preparing the ground for summer)
On the fourteenth day of the sixth month, it is traditional to eat eel.

17th Day (23 Jul): Taisho (greater heat)
In the solar calendar, Taisho is the time of the hottest days of summer.

30th Day: Setsubun and Oharae (great purification)
The thirtieth day of the sixth month is Setsubun, the eve before the beginning of Autumn. The Autumn Setsubun is not as festive as the Spring Setsubun at year's end. However, it is still considered a significant turning point for the year, used as a day of reckoning when debts are settled and obligations are discharged. In some domains, stipends are paid on Setsubun, and many contracts stipulate payment by Setsubun.
This day of reckoning is also a day of atonement, when the Emperor performs the sacred and ancient ceremony of Oharae, the Great Purification. The Oharae rituals echo the Heavenly Grotto myth, in which Amaterasu secluded herself in a grotto and emerged after being coaxed and worshipped by the heavenly hosts. The rituals include use of sacred regalia bestowed by the kami (mirrors, swords, jewels, and silk scarves), and powerful magic such as spirit-calling (shoukon) and spirit-shaking (tamafuri). The Oharae cleanses major sins committed in the past year, such as taboo defilements of sacred spaces, croplands, and relationships.
In ancient times, the Oharae may have included human sacrifices. Some tsukai and Bloodspeakers perform human sacrifices and rites of defilement on this day, such as flaying piebald horses in the reverse direction, to weaken kami and call oni.

Here are the Autumn months:

7th Month: Fumizuki (“poetry”), Month of the Rooster
8 August – 7 September
Seasonal color: Cicada wing combination (cedar bark and sky blue)
Flowers of Autumn: nashi pear, konomi nuts and seeds, tsuta ivy, bashoo inedible banana, keitoo cockscomb, kiku chrysanthemums, imo yam, ine mature rice plants, kusanohana flowering grasses, susuki pampas grass
Flowers of Fumizuki: mukuge rose of sharon, momo peach fruit, kiri hitoha falling pawlonia leaves, asagao morning glories, hagi bush clover, kuzu kudzu, kikyoo bellflower, ominaeshi yellow valerian, akanomanma knotgrass, fujibakama “purple trousers” boneset

Fumizuki, the “poetry month” or “month of literature,” is the first month of autumn. It is a bountiful time of flowers and vegetables. It also brings two sacred holidays, the the Tanabata Star Festival and the Obon Festival.
Summer soybeans may be harvested as late as early Fumizuki; autumn soybeans are planted no later than early Fumizuki.

1st Day (7 Aug): Risshuu (first day of autumn)
In the solar calendar, Risshuu is the first day of autumn.

7th Day (14 Aug): Tanabata (Star Festival)
Tanabata is one of the five Gosechi holidays.
The seventh day of the seventh month is Tanabata, the Star Festival. On the night of Tanabata, people gather outside to gaze at the stars, particularly Vega and Altair. Merriment is made with poetry, music, and dance. In the Imperial Court, the Magpie Dance is performed.
The legend of Tanabata celebrates the meeting of two lovers, the Heavenly Weaver Maiden and the Heavenly Cowherd (the two stars). The two neglected their duties to enjoy each other's company, and as punishment, the kami separated them on either side of the Heavenly River. They are permitted to meet once each year on the night of Tanabata, assisted by magpies that flock together to form a flying bridge.
In ancient times, the cowherd and maiden manifested as sacrifices of oxen and maidens. Some tsukai and Bloodspeakers perpetuate this practice.
In some regions, peasant weaver women place fruits in front of their homes and pray for skill in weaving, and that night they set out an umbrella pierced with seven holes, laced with five colored threads. If in the morning a spider has woven a web between the threads, it portends success in weaving for the year to come.

15th Day: Obon (Bon Festival)
The fifteenth day of the seventh month is the Obon Festival, when families invite back the spirits of their ancestors to return to them for one day and one night. This is a time of reunification for ancestors whose souls were in Yomi or Tokoyo; for souls damned in hell, it is a brief reprieve. The gates of the underworld are opened by the power of monks, who chant the sutras of the Shinseist canon for the entire week leading up to Obon.
Offerings of round food (rice balls, oranges, etc.) are placed in homes and temples for the dead. Hempen stems and candles are burned next to mortuary tablets to guide the spirits home. On the night of Obon, the people gather outside wearing white masks and dance under paper lanterns and fireworks. 

16th Day (23 Aug): Shosho (end of heat)
In the solar calendar, Shosho is the end of the heat of summer.

25th Day (1 Sep): Nihyakujunichi (210 days since Spring)
The twenty-fifth day of the seventh month is the 210th day since Spring. Around this time of the year, rice plants are flowering, a delicate and important stage of their growth. They are highly prone to wind damage. Unfortunately, this is also typhoon season in some regions. Music, dances, and prayers are held to forestall typhoons and protect the rice.

30th Day: Sumo Wrestling
On the thirtieth day of the seventh month, sumo wrestling matches are held to protect the rice harvest and honor the rice god.

8th Month: Hazuki (“leaf”), Month of the Dog
8 September – 7 October
Seasonal color: Aster combination (lavender and burgundy)
Flowers of Autumn: nashi pear, konomi nuts and seeds, tsuta ivy, bashoo inedible banana, keitoo cockscomb, kiku chrysanthemums, imo yam, ine mature rice plants, kusanohana flowering grasses, susuki pampas grass
Flowers of Hazuki: yanagi chiru falling willow leaves, ran orchid, wase early rice

Hazuki, the “leaf month,” is the last month before the harvest. It includes the seven-day Shinseist autumn festival, the Autumnal Equinox, and the best night of the year for moon viewing.
Hazuki is also the month for harvesting millet.

1st Day (7 Sep): Hakuro (white dew)
In the solar calendar, Hakuro marks the time when dew condenses on grass and leaves in the early morning chill. It is a cliché of autumn that people who walk in the early morning, such as a lover returning home from a secret tryst, get their clothes covered in dew.

4th Day (11 Sep): Nihyakuhatsuka (220 days since Spring)
The fifth day of the eighth month is the 220th day since Spring, another important milestone approaching the rice harvest.

12th Day: Aki higan (7-day Autumn Festival)
On the twelfth day of the eighth month, Aki Higan, a seven-day Shinseist autumn festival, begins. Like Haru Higan, monks chant the sutras of the Shinseist canon through the seven days, people commonly attend temple services daily at midday, and people visit the graves of their ancestors to clean the gravesite, make offerings, and pay their respects.

15th Day (23 Sep): Shuubun (Autumnal Equinox), Hojoe (The Great Liberation), and Kangetsu (Moon Viewing)
In the solar calendar, Shuubun is the Autumnal Equinox.
On the fifteenth day of the eighth month, the Hojoe, or Great Liberation, is held at shrines throughout the land. Birds, fish, turtles, and other animals are released into appropriate places in the wild. This is done to respect the Shinseist injunction against captivity or killing of sentient beings.
The fifteenth day of the eighth month is also famous for moon viewing, since the autumn moon is considered to be the most beautiful, and since the autumn nights are likely to have clear weather. It is almost universal for people to go out at night with friends to gaze at the moon, compose poems, and enjoy food and wine. It is traditional to offer dumplings and roasted yams to the moon on this night.

9th Month: Nagatsuki (“long”), Month of the Boar
8 October – 6 November
Seasonal color: Bush clover combination (rose and slate blue)
Flowers of Autumn: nashi pear, konomi nuts and seeds, tsuta ivy, bashoo inedible banana, keitoo cockscomb, kiku chrysanthemums, imo yam, ine mature rice plants, kusanohana flowering grasses, susuki pampas grass
Flowers of Nagatsuki: kaki persimmon, ringo apple, kuri chestnuts, yuzu citron, momoji red momiji maple leaves, kaede red maple leaves, kinoko mushrooms

Nagatsuki, the “long month,” is named because the rice has grown long. This is the month of the harvest. Rice farmers work their hardest to complete the tasks of reaping, threshing, and drying the year's single crop rice and the late rice of double cropping regions.
In southern areas that single crop rice, after the rice crop, farmers plant winter wheat.
Nagatsuki is also a month of fantastic natural beauty, when many trees, especially maple, show beautiful fall colors. There is no special holiday to view the fall leaves, but it is virtually universal for friends to join for improptu trips to go leaf viewing, with the usual merriments of wine, poetry, and music. Of course, for rice farmers, there will be no time to set aside for leaf viewing in this harvest month.
The Chrysanthemum Festival – the last of the five Gosechi holidays - is celebrated in the ninth month.

1st Day (8 Oct): Kanro (cold dew)
In the solar calendar, Kanro marks the last section of the year before farmers can expect frost. Farmers must harvest their crops in the next fourteen days, or risk losing them to frost.

7th Day: Fukandenden no Sou (Presentation of the Report on Unfit Lands)
On the seventh day of the ninth month, Ministers of Revenue present reports to their Governors and daimyo on land that has fallen into disuse or that has suffered crop failures. This report may be used to help determine tax exemptions.

Here is a description of the Winter months:

9th Day (16 Oct): Choyo no sekku (Chrysanthemum Festival)
The Chrysanthemum Festival is the last of the five Gosechi holidays.
The ninth day of the ninth month is Choyo no sekku, the Chrysanthemum Festival. Gardens, temples, shrines, and fine homes display fine specimens of the seasonal flowers, including unusual “doll chrysanthemums” grown in the shape of a human figure doll. People drink wine steeped with chrysanthemum petals on this day, to promote longevity and good health.
The Imperial Court also holds an inspection of chrysanthemums, followed by court dances and a banquet featuring chrysanthemum infused wine and dishes of white trout.

13th Day (20 Oct): Aki no douyou (preparing the ground for autumn)

16th Day (23 Oct): Soukou (frost descends)
In the solar calendar, Soukou marks the time of the year when night temperatures dip below freezing and farmers can expect frost. Delaying harvest past this point risks crop loss.

10th Month: Kaminazuki (“no gods”), Month of the Rat
7 November – 6 December
Seasonal color: Maple combination (vermillion and gray-green)
Flowers of Winter: senryoo hermit smartweed berries, manryoo spearflower berries, nanten nandin berries, ochiba fallen leaves, kangiku cold mums, karehasu withered lotus, fuyuna winter greens, daikon radish, negi onion, kabu turnip, fuyukusa winter grasses, yabukooji spearflower berries
Flowers of Kaminazuki: sazanka sasanqua, chanohana tea flowers

The tenth month is the first month of winter. Many vegetables and greens become ready in winter, but for the most part, flowers and foliage wither and fall, and the only colors to be seen in nature will be red berries and white snow. However, this is the month to harvest autumn soybeans, which tend to be planted in temperate regions in central Rokugan.
The tenth month is called Kaminazuki, the “month without gods,” because the kami gather at the greatest shrine in the land in this month.

1st Day (7 Nov): Rittou (first day of winter)
In the solar calendar, Rittou is the first day of winter. This time of the year may be the last chance to travel. Merchants, granaries, and remote villages evaluate their stores and acquire and supplies that will be needed to make it through the winter.

6th Day: Gencho (Day of the Boar)
The first Day of the Boar in the tenth month is Gencho. On this day, at the Hour of the Boar, seven special rice cakes are eaten for good fortune and good health. The rice cakes, called inoko mochi (piglet rice cakes), are egg shaped, like piglets. The seven cakes are variously filled or topped with soybeans, sweet red beans, cowpeas, ground sesame, chestnuts, persimmons, and sugar.
The Emperor and daimyo present the ladies of their courts with boxes of glutinous rice (the kind used to make rice cakes) as a special gift.

16th Day (22 Nov): Shousetsu (lesser snow)
In the solar calendar, Shousetsu marks the time when at least light snow is expected. In some areas, such as northern lands and mountain domains, roads will soon become impassable until spring. Most daimyo who will hold a Winter Court will invite their guests to arrive no later than Shousetsu.

11th Month: Shimotsuki (“frost”), Month of the Ox
7 December – 4 January
Seasonal color: Chrysanthemum combination (lavender and deep blue)
Flowers of Winter: senryoo hermit smartweed berries, manryoo spearflower berries, nanten nandin berries, ochiba fallen leaves, kangiku cold mums, karehasu withered lotus, fuyuna winter greens, daikon radish, negi onion, kabu turnip, fuyukusa winter grasses, yabukooji spearflower berries
Flowers of Shimotsuki: None

The eleventh month, Shimotsuki (“frost month”), is the time when snow falls heavily (except in the south). The Festival of the First Fruits and the Gosechi Dances are held in honor of the gods for the harvest, and the rice from this year's harvest may be eaten for the first time.
Many places become snowbound in the eleventh month. Farmers often take odd jobs to supplement their income, such as by taking jobs in towns, mining, working in forges, or making shoes, umbrellas, rope, and other goods.

1st Day (7 Dec): Taisetsu (great snow)
In the solar calendar, Taisetsu marks the time when major snowfall can occur.

4th Day: Niinamesai (Festival of the First Fruits)
Niinamesai is an ancient and sacred ceremony held to give thanks to the kami for the rice harvest. The Emperor offers rice and sacred sake to the gods, particularly Amaterasu. Newly harvested rice is not eaten until Niinamesai.

5th Day: Gosechi no Mai (Gosechi Dances)
On the fifth day of the eleventh month, following the Niinamesai, the Imperial Court holds the Gosechi Dances. 

16th Day (22 Dec): Touji (Winter Solstice)
In the solar calendar, Touji is the Winter Solstice. The solar year begins and ends with this event. The New Year is reckoned as the second new moon after Touji.
It is traditional on the eve of Touji to eat squash and bathe in citron infused water.

12th Month: Shiwasu (“priests running”), Month of the Tiger
5 January – 3 February
Seasonal color: Pine combination (sprout green and deep purple)
Flowers of Winter: senryoo hermit smartweed berries, manryoo spearflower berries, nanten nandin berries, ochiba fallen leaves, kangiku cold mums, karehasu withered lotus, fuyuna winter greens, daikon radish, negi onion, kabu turnip, fuyukusa winter grasses, yabukooji spearflower berries
Flowers of Shiwasu: soobai early plum blossoms, kantsubaki winter camelia, suisen narcissus

The twelfth month, Shiwasu (“priests running”), is named for the flurry of activity by the priests of temples and shrines. Special services are held to prepare for the New Year, and significant activity is needed just to prepare temples and shrines for the crowds who will come for the Setsubun observances and next year's Oshogatsu (New Year's) observances.

1st Day (5 Jan): Shoukan (lesser cold)
13th Day: Fuyu no douyou (preparing the ground for winter)
16th Day: Daikan (greater cold)
30th Day: Setsubun (New Year's Eve)





Net's talk about the "Karmic Inquisitors" campaign, which takes place in Damasu lands, i.e. the domain whose capital is Toshi Ranbo, the third-largest city in the Empire.

CAMPAIGN DESCRIPTION:

Positioned at the crossroads between Lion, Dragon, Phoenix, Crane, and Imperial lands, Toshi Ranbo is the third largest city in the Empire and capital of the Damasu domain of the Akodo family.

Last year, the dreaded fungal blight kumosaya destroyed half of the domain’s rice and soybean crop. Normally such blights start small and worsen over a period of years, but this one came seemingly out of nowhere. Further, it was not heralded by any omens or portents which should have forewarned the government of the coming disaster.

The suddenness of the blight combined with the lack of any divine warnings can mean only one thing: some great sin has caused the gods to bring punishment upon the domain. The PCs are sworn members of the Order of Bishamon, and have been tasked as karmic inquisitors to root out what specific sin needs to be rectified before the disfavor of the gods brings even greater disaster in the coming year.

"THE ORDER":

The PCs in the Karmic Inquisitors campaign are members of a secret society known as The Order of Lord moon.

The Order of Lord Moon is referred to as The Order in conversation, so that anyone who overhears will assume that the speaker is talking about The Order of Bishamon.

Members and roles:

There are always 12 members of The Order, most of which don’t have any official title. Each official position within The Order has an abbreviated name which it is always called in conversation outside of rituals and ceremonies.

-> Master of the Lunar Way, aka the Master of the Way. This is the head of The Order (currently Reiji), who leads ceremonies, prayers, rituals, and calls meetings to order.

-> Seeker of the Moon’s Chosen, aka the Seeker. This member (currently Eiwa) is responsible for identifying potential recruits.

-> Teacher of the Astral Ways, aka the Teacher. This member (currently Umiko) is responsible for training new initiates.

-> Steward of the Secret Cache, aka the Steward. The Order’s ceremonies require many implements, and these things must be kept hidden and brought to ceremonies by the Steward (currently Osei).

Below are the backstories for the senior members of The Order of Lord Moon:

Reiji, Master of the Lunar Way (aka "Master of The Way"):

By day, Reiji’s role in the Temple of Bishamon is that of Warden of the Five Gates. By night, he is the Master of the Lunar Way, the head of The Order of Lord Moon.

The previous Master of the Lunar Way was Kaito, who served in the Temple of Bishamon as the Master of the Inner Sanctum. Kaito was executed by Matsu Gohei and Hantei Daigotsu when the Office of the Crystal Champion came to Toshi Ranbo after the attempted assassination of the Emperor.

Also caught and executed was Ishikawa, the Champion of the Sparring Circle for the Temple of Bishamon, who served the Teacher of the Astral Ways for the Order.

Reiji was first drawn to the Temple of Bishamon when he saw a Golden Koi swimming upstream through the village creek. He abandoned his work in the fields to give chase, but it stayed just ahead of him as he followed it through the network of irrigated streams and waterways of his village. By the time he caught up with it, night was beginning to fall, and as the fish turned around to face him, it turned from gold to silver. He stepped backwards in surprised and fell on his back, and in that moment as the stars came out, he witnessed the brief shape of a celestial temple in the twilight sky, the outline of which was traced by the first few hundred starts to appear as the sun set below the horizon.

This set Reiji on his path to becoming a monk, and as he later learned, a golden koi swimming upstream is a well-known sign which embodies the strength and perseverance of Bishamon, though it was many years later that he realized that the koi turning from gold to silver represented his path through the Order of Bishamon to the secret Order of Lord Moon.

Reiji is more cautious than his predecessor, now that the Order has reason to fear the Office of the Crystal Champion.

Eiwa, Seeker of the Moon's Chosen (aka "the seeker"):

The day of Eiwa’s gempukku, he woke early from a dream in which he was flying high above the countryside into the night sky, waking as his spirit fell back to earth into his human body. Excited for the ceremony ahead, he walked outside and saw that sticking out above the doorway into his family home was lodged a fine arrow, pointing downwards into the home, as if fired in an arc from a great distance. This was well before the war, and the fletching of the arrow was made of the finest multicolored feathers that Eiwa had ever seen.

Confused and concerned, he crept out in the silence of the crack of dawn to seek out those who might have fired this arrow, be they samurai or bandits. Though the previous night’s rain left the ground wet and muddy, he found no fresh footprints anywhere on the outskirts of the hamlet where he and his family lived, not anywhere from which the arrow could have been fired, nor around the homes of his neighbors.

Increasingly unsettled, he returned home to find that the arrow was gone, and his now-awake family had not seen it, nor heard anyone else approach their home. The new mark made by the arrow above the doorway was the only sign that the arrow had ever been present.

Their country monk immediately recognized this as a sign from Bishamon, given his frequently depiction as an archer. The monk immediately began to educate Eiwa as an acolyte, and Eiwa later traveled to Toshi Ranbo to join the temple there, in fulfillment of Bishamon’s calling.

Thankfully, neither the country monk nor the first few members of the Temple of Bishamon in Toshi Ranbo who heard this story recognized the significance of Eiwa’s dream of flying, but the previous Seeker of the Chosen instantly realized this as a divine invitation from Lord Moon himself. Eiwa ascended to this position upon the death of the previous seeker almost 20 years ago.

Umiko, Teacher of the Astral Ways (aka "the teacher"):

The Tsume initially took Toshi Ranbo without fear of an immediate Lion counter-invasion because of a devastating flood which affected the eastern and southern provinces of Damasu lands. This flood was not only a catastrophe for the armies of the Lion, but for the peasants as well – thankfully this flood occurred after the Autumn harvest, so the year’s crop was not ruined, but months of intense work lay ahead to set right the fields and paddies and fix the network of irrigated streams which had all been overrun.

While tending to this task, Umiko found herself shoveling the deposit of a mudslide which had inadvertently dammed a nearby irrigated ditch which fed water into one of the village rice paddies. In the midst of this effort, she spied an object partially exposed by the landslide. As she drew closer, she discovered it was a bell, green with the patina of age, but its shape was unmistakable. This was a shrine bell, she realized, its origins lost to time until this moment. Intrigued, she set her shovel aside to unearth the bell.

As she worked, her attention was drawn by a movement at the corner of her vision. At a distance, a fox was engaged in a tense standoff with a circling hawk. The fox was clearly guarding something hidden in the tall grass – perhaps its kits. The hawk, a far larger predator, continued its threatening display.

Umiko watched as the fox, despite its smaller size, faced the hawk fearlessly, its fur standing on end in an attempt to appear larger. Then, as if deciding the hawk was no longer a threat, the fox turned and disappeared into the grass. The hawk, perhaps dissuaded by the fox’s determination, flew away.

As the fox emerged from the grass, it turned to look at Umiko. In that moment, the sun broke through the cloud cover, and the light hit the fox in such a way that it appeared to glow, its fur glistening like a field of golden rice under the autumn sun.

Suddenly, she remembered the bell. Lifting it out of the earth, she brushed off the remaining mud. That’s when she noticed it: The curve of the bell, along with its reflection in a puddle created by the recent rainfall, formed a perfect crescent shape. It was a mirrored crescent, she realized, just as the moon was currently in its crescent phase. The alignment of these events, the discovery of the shrine bell, the appearance of the fox, and the mirrored crescent, was too much to be mere coincidence.

Umiko was unusually educated for a young peasant from her village, and she understood this as a sign from Inari, the Fortune of rice and foxes. She was able to easily interpret the fox’s actions a message: to protect the innocent and the helpless, much like the fox had done with its young (or whatever unknown entities it had guarded).

Spurred by this revelation, Umiko left her village to join the Temple of Bishamon. Eiwa, the current Seeker of the Moon’s Chosen, was able to identify the mirrored crescent as a sign from Lord Moon, and recruited her into The Order, where she devoured all knowledge and wisdom, eventually being appointed as the Teacher of the Astral Ways.

Her experience with the old shrine bell also led to her being named the Herald of the Bell for the Temple of Bishamon, and it is Umiko who rings the temple bell to call the temple to prayer.

Of the members of The Order, Umiko is the most adamant about using the present crisis to bring justice to those who have been wronged by their landlords and provincial governments. The Order has mixed feelings about these suggestions, as some are cautious about confronting the powerful and bringing attention to The Order.

Osei, the Steward of the Sacred Cache (aka "the steward"):

The Order’s ceremonies require many implements, including porcelain masks, obsidian knives, black robes, white/black/red/blue candles, incense, etc. These things must be kept hidden and brought to ceremonies by the Steward.

Part of this job involves having good hiding places for these things, including:

→ Under the floorboards in rooms of the Temple of Bishamon where they are unlikely to be discovered.

→ Buried in a cemetery, where they can be retrieved and where it is unlikely that they will be found.

→ In a hidden cache in the wilderness outside the city, close to where the nighttime rituals of The Order will be performed.

→ Under the false bottom of a trunk or chest.

Osei’s personal history is itself shrouded in mystery. She was recruited by the previous Seeker of the Moon’s Chosen, and while she passed every test and evaluation put to her by The Order, the previous Seeker declined to share what details of her life story she revealed to him when he was inquiring into her past.

Here's the backstory of Tsukimichi, a member of The Order and one of the PCs of the "Karmic Inquisitors" campaign:

The nightmares started with my monthly cycles. At first they were vague and clouded, with the occasional flash of gore or horror- sharp snapping teeth, the blood stained tip of a knife. But over time, patterns of images became clear. Until on the night before my gempuku, I found myself at the base of a impossibly steep mountain path leading straight east. The largest full moon I had ever seen was rising over the path as if it led all the way to the moon itself. Light from the moon illuminated the pathway and showed it to be covered in loose scree, some of it quite sharp and already tinged with the blood of previous travelers.  I looked down at my bare feet and despaired of making any headway along that path. But oh how I wanted to. It wasnt that I felt some sort of call to the moon or to adventure. But rather this vicious challenge had been set in front of me and I felt more forlorn than I ever had at even the thought that I might not master it. I could see myself tripping lightly from rock to precariously placed stone on my tiptoes like the most graceful of dancers and I knew in that moment I had to make it happen. So the next day when I passed my challenges and became an adult, I chose the name Tsukimichi or Moon Path for the challenge that had been set before me that I did not understand but had vowed to nevertheless, conquer. 

If I had hoped this would turn some sort of tide with my nightmares, I was disappointed. Images became more fractured, sleep more disjointed.  But I was disciplined.  I was trained as a courtier and demanded perfection from myself in my professional life. I was as skilled at hiding my own weaknesses as I was at exploiting the weaknesses of opponents.  But my haunted mind did not make it easy for me. I presume I began sleepwalking. I would fall asleep in my bed and awaken in strange locations with no memory of having gotten there. Objects would disappear from my rooms and appear in the rooms of professional rivals. Or sometimes vice versa. I started suspected a darker hand at work when those rivals would occasionally sicken at opportune times for my own professional development. Each time, my dreams would clear and I would catch a glimpse of the gleaming mountain moon path, and I would wake with cuts on my feet and bloody gravel in my bed. 

The night everything turned, I awoke from a dream of gnashing teeth to find myself in an alley with a murdered woman. I didn't check who she was but I believe she was yet another professional rival. My hands were clean, but my feet were bloody. I had no memory of getting there. I was wearing my nightclothes and appeared to be unarmed. In my terror I ran for the river. The full moon cast a silvery path across the water and in my panic and hysteria I thought that perhaps all this time I had been destined to follow a different moon path to the end of my days. It would certainly be easier to traverse gracefully.

 I was on the verge of throwing myself into the river and into this new path when a kind stranger named Karinsu laid a hand upon my shoulder and pulled me back. At the time I thought him merely to be a concerned passerby. But it soon became obvious he was much more- perhaps even a boddishatvha- as he explained to me that my life was destined for a different path, in fact many different paths. As he showed me how to nature of truth and life winds around on itself creating a variety of paths of reality which can be traveled singly or together. He showed my the path that would be created if I had never been born, or the path that would be created if I took my own life that night. And then he showed me some of the possible paths the future might take if I were to keep living. He told me to see to my strength and my friends.  And he disappeared.  

A few days later, I was tapped for a diplomatic mission to Toshi Ranbo, which had just fallen to the Crane. The woman who was supposed to lead our contingent had gone out drinking to celebrate her promotion and never returned. It was presumed she had sufficiently shamed herself and was lying low, trying to come up with face saving measures before she rejoined polite society.  To my knowledge,  they never did find her. 

In Toshi Ranbo my dreams and sleepwalking increased. For the first time my professional life suffered. I visited many shrines and temples to pray for a cure. One night I awoke in front of the temple of Bishamon. My head was clear in a way it had not been clear since I was a girl. I immediately threw myself upon the mercy of the monks and asked to join holy orders. I have not had a single nightmare or sleepwalking incident since. 

(end of Tsukimichi's backstory)

Here's the backstory of Haru, another member of The Order:

During the Lion/Crane war, in accordance with the treaty between the Tsume house and the Shiba family, the Phoenix clan declared war on the Lion clan.

However, the Phoenix clan is famously pacifistic (by samurai standards), and no battles were fought – not one single Lion was killed by a Phoenix or vice versa. However, the Phoenix clan did provide significant aid, by allowing Crane troops to travel through Phoenix lands to evade Lion armies, while refusing entry into their lands by Lion wishing to do the same. This gave the Tsume a significant advantage, as the Lion clan did not wish to test the resolve of the Phoenix by invading their lands – a war in which the Southern Armies of the Phoenix were added to those of the Northern Armies of the Crane could have been a disaster for the Lion clan.

Occupying the southwestern corner of Phoenix lands, the Asako family vigilantly patrolled their borders, overlooking both sides of the war from Morning Glory Castle (aka Kyuden Asako, their capital).

With that being said, the Lion would have been foolish to not send scouts into Phoenix lands, in order to track the movements of Crane troops. While caution prevented them from going deep into Phoenix lands, the Lion still attempted to find other ways to track the movements of the Crane.

One advantage the Lion had was that the Phoenix are as pious as they are pacifistic, and thus they were unwilling to turn away pilgrims, even when those pilgrims were openly Lion clan samurai who clearly wished to gather intelligence on the movement of Crane troops and Phoenix patrols. However, the Phoenix clan mitigated these concerns by assigning escorts, and also forcing Lion pilgrims to take more roundabout routes than any other clan would take.

This was still worthwhile for the Lion clan, and Akodo no Sugiwara Ippei was one of many “pilgrims” who went through Asako lands to reach the Isawa woodlands, ostensibly to visit the Sacred Pool of Kaimetsu-Uo.

Located deep in the Isawa woodlands, this crystal clear pool of water is a revered place of tranquility and healing. The pool is named after Kaimetsu-Uo, a legendary figure in Isawa history from before the dawn of the Empire, said to have been healed in these waters after a brutal battle against an oni. It is common for those seeking healing or purification to journey here, either for themselves or on behalf of others. Pilgrims often leave small, symbolic offerings at the edge of the pool, and the Order of Kaimetsu-Uo maintains a series of baths which pilgrims must use both before and after bathing in the pool.

However, Ippei never made it to the sacred pool. Asako Haru was assigned as his escort, and Haru was ordered to take a circuitous route, entering the Isawa woodlands from the west rather than from the south, to limit the amount of information Ippei would be able to gather. Unfortunately, the group of pilgrims soon found themselves lost in the forest.

Strangely, the forest was completely silent by day, and only came alive at night with the squawking of birds and the crashing movements of large animals through the brush. The emptiness of the day made hunting difficult, which the party needed to restore their dwindling food supply. As an accomplished scout and hunter who intended his trip to be short, Ippei neither expected to need extensive provisions nor thought he would have any difficulty finding food in the forest even if they did run out. As the days dragged on and hunger ravaged the pilgrims, the few birds they were able to kill with stones seemed to do nothing to nourish or satisfy the party’s increasingly desperate hunger.

Eventually, through patience and careful planning, Ippei deployed his men to direct and trap some of the wild boar which they had heard but not been able to spot for days. However, these were no ordinary pigs, and their massive tusks and hooves caused devastating injuries to the hunters. Still, the military discipline of the Lion held strong, and a boar was slain, and the other enormous beasts fled into the night.

Unfortunately, this seemingly successful hunt took the group’s circumstances from bad to worse. To a man, all who consumed the boar meat found themselves hungrier than they were before they began. Only Akodo no Sugiwara Genjo, who was so wounded that he no longer had any appetite as he lay dying, was unaffected.

Haru tended to Genjo’s wounds, and while he did not know any of the rites and prayers given to the dying, he invented Phoenix rituals on the spot in order to comfort the dying man. As the end drew near, Genjo urged his companions to consume his body for nourishment after he passed, offering himself to his friends and comrades. The others all reacted with disgust, even though Genjo reminded them of the story of Lord Moon consuming his own children – in this strange place, imitating the ways of the King of the Night Sky would surely be appropriate (Genjo argued), or at least forgivable.

As the Lion now believed Haru to be an expert in Phoenix prayers and rituals, he was asked to administer funerary rites to Genjo’s body after he passed, while the others continued to scout and attempt to find a path out of this place. Haru found himself so overwhelmed with hunger that he prayed to Lord Moon as he decided to accept Genjo’s offer:

Lord Moon, who consumed his own in primal times, I seek your understanding as I am pushed to echo your actions. Let this act of necessity honor your celestial cycle, as death gives way to life. Guide us from this forest and into your shimmering light, as we traverse these uncharted depths.

Haru thought that he was unseen and unheard, but Akodo Ippei had remained behind, tending to his wounds and praying to his own ancestors. He said nothing directly to Haru, but after Ippei was buried, one of the scouts returned, having miraculously found a westward path.

The party reconvened, marked Genjo’s grave, and set out on the westward path. As night began to fall, the path emerged out of the forest, and the survivors were able to nourish themselves once again.

Ippei spoke privately afterwards to Haru, revealing that he had seen what Haru had done, though it was clear that he had not heard Haru’s prayer. Instead, Ippei spoke as if Haru must be ravaged with guilt and self-loathing, for he had consumed human flesh practically moments before the group was saved. Ippei and the other Lion credited their victory to the ancestral spirit of Genjo guiding them out of the forest, and only Haru understood that it was his own prayers and “feast” to Lord Moon which had saved them all from death.

Regardless, Ippei spoke with compassion, explaining that he had no intention of shaming Haru for his failings. Although he has so far kept this secret, he has also asked Haru for assistance on occasion, and clearly considers Haru to be in his debt. Whether and under what specific circumstances he would ever divulge what he saw remains unclear.

(end of backstory)







Since the Karmic Inquisitors campaign deals with monks, let's talk about how temples are structured as institutions, and then from there talk about Damasu lands more generally.

TEMPLE ORGANIZATION:

When the Shinsei was advising the Hantei on the new Empire being created, part of his guidance was the identification of the 7 Major Fortunes whose favor would bring good luck and prosperity to humanity:

Fortune:	    Domain
Benten:	        The fortune of romantic love
Bishamon:	    The fortune of strength
Daikoku:	    The fortune of wealth
Ebisu:	        The fortune of honest work
Fukurokujin:	The fortune of wisdom and mercy
Hotei:	        The fortune of contentment
Jurojin:	    The fortune of longevity

The Shinsei further recommended that each clan cultivate 2 major Fortunes to be their patrons, ensuring that every city within the clan have a temple to each of their 2 patron Fortunes.

Clan:	    Patron Fortunes
Crab:	    Bishamon + Ebisu
Crane:	    Benten + Daikoku
Dragon:	    Hotei + Ebisu
Lion:	    Bishamon + Daikoku
Phoenix:	Fukurokujin + Hotei
Scorpion:	Benten + Jurojin
Unicorn:	Fukurokujin + Jurojin

In the late 3rd century, Hantei the Tenth formalized the system of the Six Ministries, and along with it codified the requirement that each of the Empire’s cities contain a temple to each of its clan’s patron fortunes.

The temples in Toshi Ranbo are unusually large and well-funded, due to Toshi Ranbo being the 3rd-largest city in the Empire, but the general structure is the same commonly-used way to organize temples which exists everywhere.

The rank of samurai is well established throughout the Empire, according to the system of the Six Ministries laid down by Hantei the 10th.

Peasants are not samurai, and therefore the most esteemed peasant, even if they be the richest merchant in the Empire, is lower in the Celestial Order, and therefore of lower rank, than the lowliest samurai.

However, monks exist outside the Celestial Order, walking with one foot in the world and one foot outside of it, and therefore any monk is neither lower nor higher ranking than any samurai.

With that being said, religious orders must necessarily have a hierarchy in order to run a large organization. Here is what that typically looks like:

-> An Initiate is one who has begun the process of joining a religious order but is not yet a full member. Many who become initiates decide against joining an order, and this never attain any higher standing within any temple.

-> A Novice is the lowest level of monk, who has joined an order but not yet sworn all of of their religious vows. A novice would typically have sworn only a vow of obedience to the order, but not any of the more significant vows which help them on their path to enlightenment and spiritual development.

-> An Acolyte has progressed enough in their religious education within the order that they have sworn a vow of devotion to the Fortune worshiped by the order. It would be foolish to have novices swear such vows until such time as they can be trusted to keep to them, lest the broken vows bring disaster upon the order.

-> A Junior Monk has graduated in their studies to attain the standing of a monk, and is no longer considered a monk in training.

-> An Adept Monk is considered wise enough to teach initiates, novices, and acolytes.

-> A Senior Monk has been deemed worthy to be put in charge of directing the work of other monks, such as being put in charge of the custodians who clean the temple grounds, or being tasked with overseeing the temple kitchens. One of the requirements to attain the position of Senior Monk is a vow of celibacy, and senior monks therefore may not be married. This means that once a monk attains the position of Adept Monk, they must choose between starting a family and attaining a higher position within the temple.

-> Each major temple has a council of Stewards, each responsible for a division of the temple’s responsibilities, such as the temple’s treasury and budgeting, or its education of members, or the overseeing of religious ceremonies.

-> Any provincial city will have an Abbot in charge, and even temples in the capital will be run by an abbot if they do not oversee other temples out in the provinces.

-> For large temple networks such as the Order of Bishamon, the temple in the capital is known as the sovereign temple and the provincial temples are subordinate to it. As explained above, those subordinate temples will have an abbot, but the sovereign temple will be run by a Grand Abbot.

ORDERS AND TEMPLES:

First, some terminology about what we mean by an Order vs a Temple.

The Order of Bishamon refers to the network of temples, monasteries, and shrines devoted to Bishamon throughout Damasu lands. Each domain in Lion lands has its own Order of Bishamon with its own Grand Abbot.

Sometimes people refer to “the Order of Bishamon” and mean the general system of all Bishamon-related religious institutions across the entire Empire, but most of the time anyone talking any particular Order is referring to the institution within that domain.

Although the Order of Bishamon in Damasu lands will sometimes send gifts and offerings to the Order of Bishamon in the Akodo domain, this is more infrequent and informal than the rigid expectation of taxes which exist between the Damasu house government and the ruling Akodo house.

The Temple of Bishamon in Toshi Ranbo is also formally referred to as the sovereign temple, while the smaller provincial temples in each of the provincial cities of the Damasu provinces are also formally referred to as subordinate temples.

To summarize, anytime this explanation refers to the Order of Bishamon, we’re talking about the broader network of all Bishamon temples/monasteries/shrines in Damasu lands, and when this page refers to the Temple of Bishamon, we’re talking about the sovereign temple in the Damasu capital of Toshi Ranbo.

The Temple of Bishamon in Toshi Ranbo is one of the largest in the Empire, with over 200 monks living in the temple complex.  Because this is unusually large, it's not necessarily representative of most major temples in most major cities, but here are the rough numbers for the monks in each category in the temple:

Position	    Count
Novices	        80-100
Acolytes	    60-80
Junior Monks	40-60
Adept Monks	    30-40
Senior Monks	20-30
Stewards	    10-20
Grand Abbot	    1

Most of the monks in all of the above categories live in the Temple of Bishamon complex. This does not include most of the initiates, who have begun their study, usually part-time while working their existing jobs and handling their normal family obligations. As the Shinsei said of the monastic life, “many are called, few are chosen” – there are generally 200-500 initiates, more in number than all other categories combined!

Here’s a rough outline of the Order of Bishamon’s standing over the past decade and a half:

Under the old Damasu regime, the Temple of Bishamon was the biggest, richest, most influential temple in Damasu lands, due to the centrality of the fortune Bishamon in Lion life. A majority of the governments temple funding went to the Order of Bishamon, which made up roughly 50% of the Temple’s funding.

12 years ago (in the year 1117), the Tsume house invaded Toshi Ranbo and conquered the city from the Damasu house. Although during this time they would not have dared defile the temple (due to not wanting to offend Bishamon), they did raid the temple treasury, and their subsequent donations made back to the temple came nowhere close to recouping those losses.

Over the next several years of Tsume occupation, the city was in bad shape, with repeated riots over food shortages and other conditions. The Tsume government cut the city’s finding of the Order of Bishamon down to almost nothing, funneling their money instead to the Order of Daikoku and to the Order of Benten which they quickly expanded using monies which otherwise would have been directed to the Order of Bishamon. They also seized all of the “temple estates”, i.e. properties owned by the temple from which it collected rent.

The Temple of Bishamon thus not only had to contend with the emptying of its treasury, but also losing over half of its funding overnight, putting the temple’s finances in dire straits. The disorder within the city, combined with the Tsume pillaging of the temple’s normal roster of wealthy patrons made this problem worse. Additionally, the temple’s budget shortfalls led to a massive scaling back of its charitable endeavors, which further strained the ability of the city’s population to cope with the new regime. Many monks were dismissed from the Temple during this time, reassigned to the provinces or to other domains, and many of these formed the early cadre of the Baitenist movement.

Almost 4 years after the Tsume invasion, the Lion clan retook the city (in the year 1121), and it reverted to the Damasu. The Lion clan investigated the temple’s finances and found them lacking, and instead of depleting them further restored their government funding, though they did not have the resources to restore its treasury to its previous levels at this time, due to the ongoing war with the Crane clan.

About 6 years later, the Lion/Crane war ended (the peace treaty was officially signed in the year 1128), and the peace treaty involved large payments to the Lion clan. The Damasu were flush with coin, and donated generously to the Temple. In the past year, after the peace treaty was signed, the Temple’s income is double what it was even under the previous Damasu regime.

The Temple of Bishamon’s annual income before the fall of the previous Damasu regime was roughly 10,000 koku/year, which was sourced as follows:

Here is a rough breakdown of what a typical year of income was for the Temple of Bishamon prior to the fall of the Damasu:

Koku/year	Percent	Source
~4,000	    ~40%	government funding
~2,500	    ~25%	donations from the city’s population
~1,500	    ~15%	income from performing religious services and ceremonies
~1000	    ~10%	income from land, property, and other investments
~500	    ~5%	    income from the sale of non-religious goods and services
~500	    ~5%	    offerings from subordinate temples, monasteries, and shrines in the provinces

Note that all of these numbers are extremely approximate, but they should each offer a rough order of magnitude of the Temple of Bishamon’s income from various sources. One other point of interest is that the Temple of Bishamon in the capital distributes more monies in a typical year to its subordinate temples than it receives, so the 5% of “revenue” is misleading and could just as easily be expressed as a negative.

Here’s roughly what the temple has historically done with that income each year:

Koku/year	Percent	Category
~2,000	    ~20%	Religious ceremonies, events, and festivals
~1,500	    ~15%	Savings, investments, loans, land and property management
~1,000	    ~10%	Maintenance, cleaning, repair, and renovations to the Temple
~1000	    ~10%	Donations to the needy and other community projects
~1000	    ~10%	Gifts to patrons, public relations, offerings to other temples, and other forms of diplomacy
~1000	    ~10%	Funds for subordinate temples, monasteries, and shrines, as well as pilgrimages to these and other destinations
~1000	    ~10%	Scholarly pursuits, acquisition and upkeep of books, ink, paper, and other religious artifacts and symbols
~1000	    ~5%	    Room and board for the temple monks

Remember that these are all the approximate baseline numbers before everything changed when Toshi Ranbo fell to the Tsume invasion, and the Temple fell on extremely hard times for several years afterwards. This had rippling effects not immediately reflecting in high-level budget numbers.

For example, there is no line item for clothing on this budget breakdown. Partially this is because a monk’s initial set of robes would be provided out of the “room and board” budget, and replacements often come either out of the budget of the senior monk overseeing the job a monk is working, or donated by members of the community. For example, Adept monks who teach the city’s initiates often take up collections from their students in order to buy new sandals or undergarments or robes.

When the Lion took over the city, few new robes were purchased by the temple for several years, and the poor state of the temple’s finances was apparent from the increasingly worn robes which were being constantly patched and mended rather than replaced.

The above sections detail the temple’s hierarchy and budget, but this doesn’t quite describe what most of the monks are doing day-to-day. This is only somewhat reflected in how the temple receives and spends its money, since some things are mostly free and others cost enormous amounts of money.

Because monks tend to perform many roles, there’s not a simple or clear breakdown of who is doing what. For example, consider the role of education in the temple. While it’s true that some Adept monks might spend most of their time educating initiates, teaching and learning does not stop at any rank. Some senior monks will be active in continuing instruction of the junior monks under their authority, while others will be mainly concerned with temple operations. Some scribes and librarians will be fully occupied with copying and cataloging, while others will use their expertise to guide the education of the temple’s most senior members.

Because of these shared roles and responsibilities, any breakdown of temple work will add up to well over 100%. However, this is still useful to help understand how the Temple of Bishamon’s monks spend their days:

Percent	Role	            Work
~33%	Clergy	            Performing religious ceremonies, rituals, and prayers, as well as guiding others in meditation, study, and training. Some monks specialize in specific aspects of the faith or in performing particular rituals.
~25%	Educators	        The most common task is recruiting and instructing initiates who have not yet been chosen to join the temple, followed by the continuing education of the temple’s novices, acolytes, and junior monks.
~20%	Custodians	        This not only includes those who clean the temple but also the skilled work responsible for doing maintenance and repair work. In some cases this will require bringing in and overseeing outside contractors for extremely specialized labor.
~20%	Cooks	            The kitchen staff needs to be large to serve multiple meals per day to hundreds of monks, and this figure also includes those who work in community kitchens which exist as part of the Temple of Bishamon’s charitable outreach.
~15%	Scribes/Scholars	The temple librarians copy religious texts, maintain the temple’s library and archives, and engage in scholarly pursuits related to the temple’s religious teachings and history. Making new copies of the Tao (and other religious texts) in particular is such an incredibly time consuming and important work which many monks devote their entire lives to it.
~10%	Administrators	    Responsible for managing the temple’s finances, resources, and personnel, the stewards and senior monks in these positions also liaise with the city government (particularly the Damasu Ministry of Rites), handle correspondence with other temples, and manage temple visitors and pilgrims.
~10%	Philanthropy	    Those who oversee and distribute the temple’s charitable donations, which include not only direct donations to the poor but also things like soup kitchens and the like.
~10%	Security	        Responsible for maintaining safety and order within the temple grounds and protecting the temple’s valuable religious artifacts and sacred spaces. Counterintuitively, the Temple of Bishamon actually has fewer monks in this role than other temples, because martial training is so much more common as part of the Order of Bishamon’s religious education. Thus, while some other temples require a larger staff specifically devoted to security, the Temple of Bishamon has a smaller percentage of its members specifically designated in this role.
~10%	Pilgrims	        This includes not only the holy journeys we think of when talking about pilgrimages, but also coordinating with the subordinate temples in the provinces and managing the offerings and donations which flow in both directions.

There are other miscellaneous specialized roles within the temple not listed here, but the above should give a decent idea of the overall categories. Remember that the above percentages add up to much more than 100% due to the fact that many monks perform multiple roles at different times.

Another way to think about temple life is to think about what a typical day looks like for monks in the Temple of Bishamon.

Considering the various roles and jobs which exist in the temple, this varies considerably from monk to monk, but I’ll list a few examples to give a general sense of the rhythm and flow of temple life.

First let’s consider the daily routine of Kenta, who reports to the Custodian of the Temple Grounds.

Hour	Task	Description
Hour of the Tiger (4-6am)	Waking and morning prayers	Like most temple monks, Kenta often wakes before dawn to begin his day. After waking, Kenta hurries to attend the temple’s communal morning prayers.
Hour of the Hare (6-8am)	Cleaning duties	Kenta begins his custodial work early in the day, with tasks like sweeping the grounds, cleaning the main hall, and especially any tasks which are best performed while the day’s weather is still cool.
Hour of the Dragon (8-10am)	Breakfast and rest	The temple provides a daily communal breakfast, typically rice and vegetables. After eating, Kenta spends some time in daily meditation, which provides him with the physical rest and spiritual centering that will prepare him for the remainder of the day.
Hour of the Serpent (10am-noon)	Cleaning duties	As the day heats up, Kenta tends to focus on indoor tasks. Note that this cycle of indoor/outdoor tasks is often reversed between the summer and winter, as snow on the ground usually makes it more advisable to perform indoor tasks in the early hours and outdoor tasks at midday.
Hour of the Horse (noon-2pm)	Midday prayers and lunch	At midday Kenta participates in another period of communal prayers and meditation, followed by the temple lunch, which is similar to breakfast in its simplicity.
Hour of the Goat (2-4pm)	Personal time	While many of the custodial staff use this time for afternoon naps, Kenta uses this time for continuing education. He aspires to become an Adept monk, but first he must improve his reading and writing abilities, which he does by attending classes taught by the Teacher of Bishamon’s Wisdom. Once his literacy has improved, he will “graduate” to begin receiving direct instruction from the Senior monk who oversees him.
Hour of the Monkey (4-6pm)	Cleaning duties	As the day cools down, Kenta either resumes his outdoor cleaning (in the summer) or his indoor tasks (in the winter).
Hour of the Rooster (6-8pm)	Evening prayers and dinner	Just as the day begins with prayers, so does it end. Kenta looks forward to the temple dinners, which are larger and fuller meals than the simple breakfasts and lunches. Dinner may involve soup, noodles, pickles, bean curd, seitan, and on some nights the kitchen serves fried tempura or a piece of fresh fruit as a dessert.
Hour of the Dog (8-10pm)	Bathing and personal time	While some of the other young monks venture out into the city for entertainment during this time, Kenta usually spends a few minutes relaxing his thoughts and then turning in about 60 minutes before the Hour of the Boar, when most of the temple turns in for the night. Once his literacy improves enough for it to be practical, he plans to spend this time reading the Tao and whatever other texts his sensei recommends to him.

As another example, consider the daily routine of Mizuki, who serves as the Scribe of the Eternal Tao. She is a senior monk who oversees the all copying of the Tao performed by all scribes in the temple library.

Hour	Task	Description
Hour of the Tiger (4-6am)	Waking and morning prayers	Rather than answering the call to morning prayers rung by the Herald of the Bell, Mizuki instead calls together her scribes to lead them in directed prayer and meditation based on what parts of the Tao will be copied on this day. She invites them to consider the koans and riddles and wisdom of the Shinsei they are about to transcribe, and has each of her scribes select a single word related to their day’s work which shall be the focus of their centering prayer.
Hour of the Hare (6-8am)	Planning and organizing	Mizuki begins her workday by reviewing the day’s tasks and planning any special projects that must be handled, such as messages, correspondence, purchases, meetings, deliveries, etc.
Hour of the Dragon (8-10am)	Breakfast and review of work	After a simple communal breakfast of rice and vegetables, Mizuki reviews the previous day’s transcriptions, looking for errors or areas of improvement in her scribes’ copying and calligraphy. During this time, she will mentor the junior scribes based on their previous day’s output, to help them learn and improve.
Hour of the Serpent (10am-noon)	Management and oversight	Mizuki typically splits this time between providing guidance and advice as needed to her scribes and performing transcription herself. These two tasks are related, as demonstrating how such things are properly done serves as a useful form of instruction for the junior monks.
Hour of the Horse (noon-2pm)	Lunch and administrative duties	Mizuki is typically too busy to join her workers for midday prayers and meditation, and often works through lunch without noticing her own hunger. This is the time when she continues the day’s special projects now that there is sufficient light to write correspondence, order new materials, and update her team’s financial records. When the temple was suffering financially under the Tsume and in the aftermath of the Damasu retaking the city, Mizuki’s team couldn’t afford the cost of the candles and lanterns necessary to do this work in the early morning or late evening, and now that the temple’s treasury has been restored to its former glory she is slowly re-accustoming herself to the new normal.

Mizuki’s scribes are not allowed the normal midday break. Unlike cooks and custodians and lecturers, Mizuki’s team needs sunlight to for their work, and so they work with few breaks throughout the daylight hours, taking their personal time in the morning and evening.
Hour of the Goat (2-4pm)	Personal study	During this time, Mizuki continues to oversee her team, but shifts her own work from transcription to study, diving deeper into the Tao to gain the understanding which only comes with intense and continued study, contemplation, meditation, and prayer. During this time, she especially contemplates any questions she has recently been posed, either by members of her team or students she instructs, or by those she has met with from outside the temple.
Hour of the Monkey (4-6pm)	Oversight and teaching	In addition to the normal oversight and review of the work being performed by her scribes, Mizuki spends some of this time lecturing and leading members of the temple in prayer and meditation, usually based on some of the teachings having been transcribed earlier in the day. Her students consist of a combination of members of the temple library and monks from other parts of the Temple of Bishamon. Occasionally a visiting samurai or pilgrim to the temple will join her lectures, which some have referred to as “one of the temple’s hidden gems”.
Hour of the Rooster (6-8pm)	Dinner and personal time	With the sun’s light fading, Mizuki ends her day’s work by enjoying the temple dinner, which is especially welcome on days when she found herself working through lunch. Sometimes she eats outside the temple with patrons and benefactors, often samurai who have commissioned copies of the Tao, to whom she often repeats snippets from her lectures.

On days when Mizuki needs to leave the temple to purchase additional supplies or handle other business, this is generally the time when she does so.
Hour of the Dog (8-10pm)	Personal time, bathing, and preparing for the next day	Depending on the hardships of the day, Mizuki might spend this time in additional study, having evening tea with her closest friends in the temple, or finishing up the day’s work by candlelight now that the Temple of Bishamon can once again afford candles.

Hopefully the similarities and differences between Kenta and Mizuki can help give an idea of the general rhythm of temple life.

For married monks (remember that only Adept monks and below can marry, while Senior monks and above must swear a vow of celibacy), the personal time is usually spent with their families, who usually live in or next to the temple complex in temple housing.





Now let's talk about the timeline of events related to the Karmic Inquisitors campaign:

Year	Events
1116	Akodo no Damasu Kojima, daimyo of the Damasu house, executes a Tsume noble for smuggling without bringing the matter before any Imperial magistrate.
1117	Doji no Tsume Retsu, daimyo of the the Tsume house, invades Toshi Ranbo in retaliation, taking the city in a sneak attack immediately after a giant flood which prevented any immediate reinforcements from other Lion domains. Kojima is killed along with most of his extended family and almost all of his high-ranking retainers from the Damasu chancellary and ministries.
1118	The Lion clan attempts to retake the city after the spring thaw. Doji Chuto, General of the Northern Armies of the Crane, successfully defends it, killing Akodo Toturi’s brother, resulting in Toturi becoming the next daimyo of the Lion clan.
1119	Tsume Retsu is murdered under mysterious circumstances. The killer is never found. Enemies of the Tsume point to his son, Doji no Tsume Takashi, who becomes daimyo of the Tsume house. Takashi and his retainers maintain the his father’s political enemies had Retsu assassinated.
1120	The prophet Baiten reveals that the next Day of Thunder is at hand.
Prince Hantei Fukuhachi prevents the government of Toshi Ranbo from prosecuting Baiten.
Doji Chuto is murdered by a bloodspeaker (whose name may not be spoken except by those with a rite of vengeance against him, but who all locals know is Jama Manabu), and Oni no Manabu ravages the city.
The prophet Baiten returns to the city and is murdered – it later becomes apparent this was ordered by the moon cultist Imperial Magistrate Shinjo Jotsu.
Jotsu’s Imperial magistrate colleague Otaku Taira becomes a ronin and goes on a religious pilgrimage to gather forces to oppose the moon cult.
1121	The Lion Clan retake the city of Toshi Ranbo, escalating tensions and triggering a buildup of troops on both sides of the border.
1122	The Lion/Crane war begins.
1123	The Day of Thunder occurs.
Bayushi Shoju is murdered. His brother, Bayushi Aramoro later marries his widow, Bayushi Kachiko.
Hida Kisada is wounded, and his oldest daighter Hida O-Ushi, the Crab Thunder, is killed.
Jama no Iuchiban Kohaku arrives late to the Day of Thunder, fails to stop the 7 Thunders from defeating Shinjo Jotsu, and takes revenge by slaying the remaining Thunders. Oni no Kohaku kills hundreds of samurai before being slain. Kohaku announces that all loyal moon cultists should take refuge in Kyuden Shinjo, where the moon cult remains strong.
1124	Shinjo Hanari executes Shinjo Yokatsu for high treason against the Empire, and declares a blood debt on his line, and becomes daimyo of the Unicorn clan.
1127	The Black Scrolls are opened and recharged at the Forgotten Tomb.
Kuni Yori is executed for high treason against the Empire for experimenting with moon cultists and the practice of maho. Kuni Utagu becomes the new Jade Champion.
Iuchi Shahai and the remaining moon cultists attempt to assassinate the Emperor at Imperial Winter Court at Kyuden Shinjo.
Shinjo Hanari excecutes Iuchi Daiyu, the daimyo of the Iuchi family (and Shahai’s father), and declares a blood debt on Shahai’s line. Iuchi Morijiro (a priest rather than a bushi) becomes daimyo of the Iuchi family.
1128	The Crab clan, under the direction of the Kuni Witch hunters, begin experimenting with the Black Scrolls.
With the Lion/Crane war ended, a dueling tournament is conducted according to the terms of the peace treaty to settle the ownership of several disputed provinces between the Tsume and Damasu.
1129	A fungal blight destroys half of the Damasu rice and soybean crop, with only 1 Tsume province being seriously affected.
Timeline of events specifically relating to the moon cult
The PCs belong to the Order of Lord Moon, which they conversationally refer to as “The Order”. (If they are ever overhead discussing “The Order”, they can easily claim that they are referring to The Order of Bishamon, to which they also belong.)

The Order of Lord Moon has operated in this area since before the dawn of the Empire, keeping secret prayers and rituals whose power is too limited to share. Like many of the secret sutras revealed by the Shinsei to the Hantei Emperor, some of the gifts of Lord Moon are distributed among all who perform the sacred rituals. The Order of therefore restricts its membership and perpetuates itself as a secret society so as to not be forced to reveal their hidden knowledge. If the rituals of The Order became universally available, Lord Moon’s blessings would be divided into so many small pieces as to be worthless to any individual worshiper. Through the centuries, The Order has found 12 to be an auspicious number of members, and strives to maintain exactly 12 disciples at all times.

Much like The Order itself, titles within The Order of Lord Moon have a full version and a less-incriminating abbreviated version. The full title is only used during sacred ceremonies and the abbreviated version is used at all other times. The head of The Order has the title The Master of the Lunar Way, but is referred to conversationally as “Master of the Way”, allowing members to claim that they are only referring to that person as a master of the Way of Shinsei.

1118
The Lion clan’s counterattack against the city after the spring thaw was massive but uncoordinated. Akodo Arasou launched an assault from all sides, using his massive advantage in numbers to force the defenders to fight at all city gates and at every possible point of entry.

When Lion forces broke through and established a bridgehead within the city, the Lion armies should have pulled back from their assault on other parts of the city walls to push forward into the city. However, there were many different Lion daimyo present, and none of them wanted to enter the city riding the coattails of a rival. Doji Chuto perceived this dynamic and did not order his men to fall back. Instead, he deployed all of his reserves to push the Lion back before they could secure their place, rather than pulling back to the inner city as most any other general would have done. This tactic was risky, but it succeeded at repelling the intruders and refortifying their defensive position.

Most of the other Lion daimyo present redoubled their efforts to breach the city’s defenses, far past the point where it was wise to do so, taking such heavy casualties that the entire operation ended in failure. Among those killed in this attempt was Akodo Arasao, the future daimyo of the Lion clan. After losing their general and taking such heavy losses, the Lion clan withdrew and the Crane clan kept the city.

With his brother dead, Akodo Toturi was named the next daimyo of the Lion clan, and he immediately began planning the next attempt to retake Toshi Ranbo. Akodo Kage, Revered Sensei of the Lion Clan, and personal karo to Akodo Toturi, spent the remainder of the year recruiting peasant operatives to infiltrate the city. They trickled in along with the other craftsmen and laborers who flock to the city looking for work, waiting for orders. Most were isolated and without direct knowledge of each other, but they were all led by Matsu Hiroru, a talented pupil of Akodo Kage and brother to Matsu Tsuko, daimyo of the Matsu family.

During this time, the city’s granaries and storehouses were largely emptied after being strained by the city’s defense, and this led to riots and demonstrations by the peasantry, which prompted governor Tsume Yasujiro to declare martial law. Prince Hantei Fukuhachi, the Emperor’s youngest adult son, was assigned to oversee the transition and provide Imperial oversight to the city’s administration. Prince Fukuhachi was tasked primarily with ensuring that order was maintained, and that further uprisings were not permitted in the Emperor’s third-largest city, a mere few hundred miles from Otosan Uchi.

The Tsume mainly left alone the monks and priests who maintain the favor of the gods (beyond plundering the temples for their treasuries). Haruki was Master of the Way during this period, though his official position within the Order of Bishamon was the Warden of the Five Gates. As a non-samurai monk he retained his position under Crane rule, as did most other members of The Order. However, every political post in the Ministry of Rites was filled with Tsume candidates, including the positions held by non-samurai.

1119
The prophet Baiten was largely unknown at this time in Toshi Ranbo, though he had developed quite a following in Phoenix lands. At the beginning of 1119, Baiten was spreading his ministry through Dragonfly lands to the northwest of Toshi Ranbo, but many of his disciples came to the city to spread his teachings.

One of Baiten’s followers was a man named Hideo who started a group devoted to educating peasants in religious songs and chants. After much discontent over the harsh treatment of the city’s populace, Hideo eventually made a public speech in which he possibly said and/or implied (reports vary about precisely what was said) that Prince Fukuhachi would be like the next Iuchiban, dividing the Empire and aiding the forces of darkness through immoral and unjust actions.

Hideo’s followers denounced the speech and claimed to have had no idea he would give it. Prince Fukuhachi still had every member of the group executed, which was followed by significant additional unrest. After this incident, Prince Fukuhachi appointed a Board of Justice composed of 5 Imperial Magistrates drawn from other clans to oversee Toshi Ranbo’s 5 districts. These magistrates were sent for at the end of the year and arrived the following spring.

Towards the end of the year, Tsume Retsu, the man who had conquered Toshi Ranbo, was murdered under mysterious circumstances. His killer has never been found.

1120
The three most noteworthy (to The Order) members of the Imperial Board of Justice which reported to Prince Fukuhachi were Shinjo Jotsu, Yasuki Suzuki, and Otaku Taira.

When the prophet Baiten eventually came to the city, he drew enormous crowds – tens of thousands of peasants would gather to hear him preach. The Tsume city government was concerned about the potential for additional unrest, and it is said that they considered having him executed but were stopped by Prince Fukuhachi. Suzuki attempted to have Baiten assassinated, but the attempt failed, with the assassins killed by the crowd before they could be questioned, and Suzuki’s involvement was only later discovered. The unrest which followed as many of Baiten’s followers blamed the city for this attempt led to Baiten being exiled by governor Yasujiro.

Meanwhile, the political officials who came into the new provincial Ministry of Rites were overwhelmed with their new responsibilities. While they were experienced at all the usual formulaic prayers and celebrations and festivals, many of the local rites and practices fell by the wayside. This angered the ancestral god of the Damasu during the pivotal time when the distances between the realms are at their lowest and the barriers at their weakest.

Ishikawa was a member of The Order, who also served in the Order of Bishamon as the Champion of the Sparring Circle. As the senior disciple of Ryoshun, Ishikawa was visited in a dream by Ryoshun while he was outside the city, who revealed that the ancestral god of the Damasu had allowed him into the domain. Ryoshun required additional permission to be granted by an Imperial authority in order to enter Toshi Ranbo, as per the compacts between Lord Moon and Lady Sun.

Ishikawa relayed the instructions he had been given as to how to open the way for Ryoshun to approach a member of the Board of Justice. Two members of the Imperial Board of Justice (Yasuki Suzuki and Otaku Taira) would become afflicted by the Wasting Disease. Taira would travel north to Dragon lands to be healed by the prophet Baiten, while Suzuki would race to Phoenix lands, accompanied by his friend Shinjo Jotsu, to seek the aid of the Council of Elemental Masters. In repayment for saving his life, Suzuki would go Walking the Way into the realm of dreams to retrieve an artifact of great power for Isawa Tadaka, the Elemental Master of Earth. At the appointed time, the four most senior members of The Order entered a shared dream to open the way for Ryoshun, as instructed, to approach Suzuki and strike a bargain with him.

Suzuki left the city shortly thereafter, and his companion Jotsu appeared to betray him upon his departure. He revealed to the city government that Suzuki had struck a bargain with a servant of Lord Moon, granting members of Lord Moon’s heavenly court entry into the city of Toshi Ranbo for a period of 3 years. Prince Fukuhachi wrote an order rescinding this permission, but when he attempted to sign and seal the decree, his Imperial signet ring left no mark on the melted wax.

During this time, members of The Order felt their powers and abilities strengthening like never before. What had previously been the pinnacle of mastery was now recategorized as The First Phase of a larger set of gifts. The Order was clearly being rewarded for their efforts, even if Suzuki’s position in the city was at an end.

Having also returned from being healed by the prophet Baiten, Otaku Taira shared the revelation that the next Day of Thunder was at hand. He declared that his own dreams had been interpreted by the prophet, and that Governor Yasujiro should be replaced. Taira fought and won a duel against Yasujiro’s yojimbo, killing Tsume Koreshiba, who had been known as the greatest surviving duelist of the Tsume family. Governor Yasujiro stepped down and was replaced by Tsume Momoko, a district lieutenant who was chosen over dozens of more senior candidates at the urging of the Board of Justice.

During this time, a bloodspeaker whose name is forbidden to speak but who all locals know to be named Jama Manabu began targeting well-known nobles in the city. His most widely-known early exploit was when he attempted to kidnap Tsume Horibinu, the county magistrate of Hokobayashi, a short distance outside the city.

With the local Witch Hunter in active pursuit of Manabu, Prince Fukuhachi set out with Board of Justice members Shinjo Jotsu, Otaku Taira, and Shosuro Ajo to visit the prophet Baiten and consult with him about how to expel the servants of Lord Moon from the city. While he was gone, The Order proceeded to remove all of their ceremonial implements and costumes from the city to make themselves in compliance with the new decree that the worship of Lord Moon shall not be permitted within the walls of Toshi Ranbo.

The specifics of Prince Fukuhachi’s meeting with the prophet Baiten are heavily disputed. Baiten’s counsel to the Prince was so upsetting that Prince Fukuhachi’s yojimbo took umbrage and attacked Baiten, which resulted in a brawl. Otaku Taira defended the prophet, but in so doing he struck the Prince, and was later stripped of his family name and exiled as a ronin for having done so. Rumors abound in Toshi Ranbo to this day about what really occurred, but immediately afterwards Prince Fukuhachi was assigned the position of General of the 1st Imperial Legion, where to this day he guards the Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands. His older brother Hantei Daigotsu, the Emperor’s second son and previous general of the 1st Legion, took over Prince Fukuhachi’s position as Imperial overseer of Toshi Ranbo.

While this dispute was being handled, Jama Manabu struck again, murdering Doji Chuto and using his name at the moment of his death to recall Oni no Manabu, which proceeded to ravage the city, killing its victims by the hundreds and wounding them by the thousands. Upon his return to the city, Shinjo Jotsu proceeded to track down Manabu an take him by surprise, beheading him in the middle of what appeared to be a routine interview of many local peasants. Manabu’s identity as a bloodspeaker was confirmed by the previously-hidden taint in his body no longer being concealed in death.

Prince Hantei Daigotsu summoned Baiten to the city and tasked him with expelling the servants of Lord Moon. Baiten made many demands of the city government, but in the end a great ritual was planned, with hundreds of monks and priests in and out of the city leading tens of thousands in prayer. Members of The Order arranged to lead peasants in the countryside in prayer so that no one from The Order would be present in the city while this ritual was being performed, lest they be struck down by its power.

At the culmination of the ritual, the city gates of Toshi Ranbo were blown open and severely damaged as the members of Lord Moon’s heavenly court were expelled from the city. In the hours after the ritual, rogue city magistrates set upon the prophet and murdered him – it was years later before they were discovered to have been acting at the direction of Shinjo Jotsu.

The city gates were quickly repaired, but the repair work focused on the ability to repel a Lion assault from outside the city. The agents in the city recruited by Akodo Kago and coordinated by his pupil Matsu Hiroru were able to attack the city gates from within and sabotage them just ahead of the second Lion invasion. This time Akodo Toturi struck just after the first major snowfall had melted, and with the aid of the carefully planned sabotage his forces were able to easily overwhelm the city’s defenses a few days into the new year. Governor Tsume Momoku was killed, along with her new husband Doji Hirota and most of the high ranking Tsume and Doji nobles in the city.

1121
The Order found their powers continuing to grow, even with Ryoshun having been expelled from the city. The Order continued to pray for guidance, but none came. By the time any member of The Order attained the Third Phase as a Disciple of Goju, Suzuki was too far from the city to be able to track.

The members of The Order contemplated sending their senior Disciple of Goju on a pilgrimage around the Empire in an attempt to find Suzuki. After all, it was he who Ryoshun had approached, and it was by his hand that members of Lord Moon’s heavenly court had been granted access to Toshi Ranbo. Perhaps finding him would allow them to continue their path in Lord Moon’s service. But with it being unclear where to look for him, and without a particular plan as to what to do if he was found, The Order decided not to split their membership on such an extended and uncertain journey.

1122
While it took over a year for the Lion/Crane war to officially begin, those in Toshi Ranbo could see it coming long before it was made official just after the spring thaw of this year.

1123
Shortly before the Day of Thunder, the descendant of Shinsei Grand Abbot Okawa discerned that crystal would be the key to a new technique by which moon cultists could be detected. Though he died before he could develop the particulars of the technique, he sent word of this revelation with a trusted messenger just before the final confrontation with Shinjo Jotsu, who was revealed on the Day of Thunder to be the true inheritor of the Moon Cult, wielding the power of Lord Moon against the Seven Thunders. (Also killed was Hida O-Ushi, the Crab Thunder and daughter of Hida Kisada, the daimyo of the Crab clan.)

This came only weeks after moon cultists in the Scorpion Clan murdered their daimyo Bayushi Shoju in an attempted coup. They were thwarted by his brother Bayushi Aramoro, whose agents had only just begun infiltrating the cult when they sprung their coup.

Jotsu was ultimately killed on the Day of Thunder, and shortly afterwards the bloodspeaker Jama Kohaku appeared on the scene, declaring himself to have been delayed and unable to fight alongside Jotsu as planned. However, he did kill the surviving Thunders, including the Unicorn Thunder Otaku Taira, whose family name was restored posthumously. Kohaku declared that all loyal members of the moon cult should retreat to Kyuden Shinjo, where the moon cult remained strong.

1124
Shinjo Hanari quickly overthrew Shinjo Yokatsu as soon as word of Jama Kohaku’s declaration reached him, executing the former daimyo for high treason against the Empire and declaring a blood debt against his family line. Because the technique of moon cultist detection was not yet known, Hanari had no way of knowing who was a cultist, and like Bayushi Aramoro before him, he reacted by killing anyone who could possibly be a cultist, also killing or exiling their families.

However, there were some moon cultists which both Hanari and Aramoro kept alive. These were turned over to the Kuni Witch Hunters for experimentation. Kuni Yori devised various procedures to uncover their weaknesses in order to develop a means by which someone could be tested for whether they were a moon cultist. The only reliable, useful test which has been widely disseminated is to focus sunlight through crystal into a person’s eye long enough to blind them in that eye – in moon cultists, this blackens the eye throughout, including in spots which were not touched by the focused sunlight.

1125
Kuni Yori’s efforts were successful, and he sent word to the Hantei Emperor of his findings that a moon cultist could be detected by focusing sunlight through a crystal to burn out one of their eyes. While this would strike anyone blind, it would cause an additional blackening of the eyeball which would reveal a moon cultist for what they are.

It turned out that Kuni Yori was successful at this in part because of a partnership he struck with moon cultists who he had captured. Emperor Hantei the 16th, the Steel Chrysanthemum, had granted the Jade Champion the right to practice maho, in order to better learn the ways of the enemies of the Empire. This Imperial decree was later rescinded, but Kuni Yori possessed an original copy of the order, and used it to claim the right to take the names of the moon cultists on whom he was experimenting.

Able to track and manipulate them using the power over them provided by his possession of their names, Kuni Yori traveled with these moon cultists, disguised as his servants. He brought them on his mission from the Emperor to recharge the Black Scrolls, during which he revealed his copy of Hantei the 16th’s Imperial decree to those under his command. The bushi brought on this mission were not fooled, and they immediately executed him. However, they were unaware that his servants were moon cultists, who were now freed from his control and once again in possession of their own names, and these moon cultists slipped away from Ranpo Temple before they could be discovered for what they were.

The Emperor proceeded to appoint his second son, Hantei Daigotsu, to head the new Office of the Crystal Champion, which was tasked with hunting moon cultists. The roles and responsibilities of this office are yet are still not yet fully defined, as the Crystal Charter has not yet been written.

At Imperial Winter Court later that year, Iuchi Shahai revealed herself to be a moon cultist and attempted to assassinate the Emperor. She managed to escape, though her plan failed, and the Emperor was able to successfully broker lasting peace treaties between the warring Lion/Unicorn and Lion/Crane factions.

Iuchi Shahai’s coven and the captives of Kuni Yori are the two main groups of treasonous moon cultists which are known to be at large in the Empire today.

1128
In the aftermath of the attempted assassination of the Emperor, Toshi Ranbo came under increased scrutiny, as it was known as the birthplace of the moon cult. It had been previously assumed that Jotsu brought any confederates with him when he left the city, but after Iuchi Shahai demonstrated how active the cult still was, a renewed fear of lingering cultists gripped the city.

The first act of Hantei Daigotsu in his capacity as the first Crystal Champion was to come to Toshi Ranbo with Matsu Gohei in order to ferret out any possible moon cultists. Daigotsu worked to attempt to map out everyone who had contact with Shinjo Jotsu, as well as who fit the profile for having the powers known to be possessed by moon cultists.

The Order hoped that they would evade scrutiny due to the fact that no member of The Order ever interacted with Jotsu. Unfortunately, Ishikawa, Champion of the Sparring Circle of the Temple of Bishamon, was a disciple of Ryoshun, and his reputation was his downfall. He was “put to the test” (his eye was burned out with crystal) and revealed as a moon cultist.

Many other members of the Order of Bishamon were immediately put to the test, including the Master of the Lunar Way (head of The Order), Kaito, who had been serving as the Master of the Inner Sanctum of the Temple of Bishamon. Interestingly, another member of The Order, Natsuo, was put to the test due to her closeness with Master Kaito, and she passed the test.

It appears that members of The Order who have attained only the Crescent Moon Phase of their discipleship of any of Lord Moon’s servants will pass a crystal test, whereas members who have reached the Gibbous Moon Phase will not. It is unclear whether a half-moon phase would exceed whatever threshold causes the eye to blacken in the characteristic manner which gives away a cultist.

Kaito and Ishikawa were both taken away and questioned, but The Order had previously discussed what story to tell in this situation, and they both clearly stuck to their prepared tale of having been recruited by Jotsu and not aware of any other cultists in the city. Though in all likelihood they were likely promised that they would not be executed if they gave up additional moon cultists, a promise made credible by other moon cultists having previously spent long years in captivity, they remained loyal to The Order, and no other members were betrayed to the Crystal Champion, and both Kaito and Ishikawa were executed.

In the aftermath of losing the two highest-ranking members of The Order, the powers of the remaining members immediately increased by a noticeable amount. The Order had always limited its membership due to the limited nature of the blessings of Lord Moon, and it appears that even with the recent elevation in the powers bestowed, this dynamic is still very much in play.

The Order debated internally about whether to continue to induct new members. There have been exactly 12 members for centuries, 12 is an auspicious number, many of the rituals performed by The Order require exactly 12 participants, and thus it was unclear whether limiting the membership would outweigh the potential downsides. However, this was contentious, and The Order was split on the issue, though a slim majority were eventually swayed to maintain tradition by Reiji, the new Master of the Lunar Way.

In the aftermath of multiple “moon cultists” having been found in the Order of Bishamon, many senior members of the temple were dismissed from their posts. This caused another debate within The Order about whether members should pursue advancement within the ranks of the Sovereign Temple of Bishamon. The more remarkable your gifts and talents, the more suspicion you might draw. It was eventually decided that individual members could choose to pursue such advancement if they wished, but The Order would not push any individual members to seek promotions.

Master Reiji chose to seek promotion and became the Warden of the Five Gates of the Temple of Bishamon. The PCs may or may not have achieved promotion during this time – this will be determined at character creation.

Apart from this entire affair, a dueling tournament was held at the end of the year according to the terms of the peace treaty between the Lion and Crane, which determined the final ownership of several disputed provinces. The Lion did well for themselves overall, though 1 province in particular was lost in a surprise upset due to Doji Masayo, who appeared at the tournament with the cursed sword Shitsuten.

1129
The fungal blight kumosaya struck the domain. Initially it did not appear that it would have great effect, but ultimately it destroyed half of the rice and soybean crops, devastating the domain and causing much hardship, especially among the peasantry, many of whom fell deeply into debt due to being unable to pay their debts.

The Order of Bishamon has been asked by the Damasu chancellary to look into why this happened, and why most of the omens and portents did not warn the administration of a pending catastrophe.





LORD MOON'S HEAVENLY COURT:

Since the Karmic Inquisitors are PCs who are members of The Order of Lord Moon, let's go over some details about the members of Lord Moon's heavenly court which are worshipped by The Order.

Members of The Order become disciples of one or more servants of Lord Moon – members of his heavenly court. At present, there are three different levels of abilities, referred to as the Crescent Moon Phase of abilities, the Half Moon Phase of abilities, and the Gibbous Moon phase of abilities.

Each PC begins the campaign with three Phases worth of abilities. You may mix and match progression in discipleship of any of Lord Moon’s celestial servants, e.g. you can take the Crescent Moon abilities of three different celestials or the Crescent Moon, Half-Moon, and Gibbous Moon abilities of a single servant.

Until recently, the Crescent Moon abilities were all that were known to The Order. Only after The Order helped Lord Moon’s servants enter the city of Toshi Ranbo 9 years ago did members begin progressing to higher levels of mastery.

As a reminder of what is also described on the Timeline, it is known that possessing only Crescent Moon abilities makes you safe even if put to the test for being a moon cultist. It is also known the possessing even one Gibbous Moon ability will cause you to fail such a test, showing yourself to be a moon cultist if tested in this way. It is unknown what would occur if someone with Half Moon abilities were tested. Because this is known by all members of The Order, some initiates have made the deliberate decision to limit their progression in the discipleship of any one path, spreading out their mastery to remain safe.

Ryoshun – the Guardian or the Protector:

In the early days of creation, the celestial realms and the mortal realm were closely intertwined, with celestial beings freely passing between them. The heavenly beings of the day and night roamed the world, upsetting the balance of the elements as they strove to each shape the world according to their particular whims and wills. Lord Moon saw the danger this posed to the balance of creation, and tasked his servant Ryoshun with guarding the threshold to the celestial heavens.

Ryoshun is easily identifiable as the star at the highest point in the night sky directly above the world. He watches the skies to prevent other celestials from entering the mortal realm without permission from Lord Moon or Lady Sun, but he is more lenient about allowing denizens from the mortal realm to pass freely across the threshold if they are able to find the way. Such passage is easier when the distances between the realms is at its lowest, as it is now understood to be in the years around a Day of Thunder.

Indeed, it was Ryoshun himself who first entered the Damasu domain in the aftermath of the Tsume invasion. The ancestral god of the Damasu was not being properly worshipped, and so he was receptive to Ryoshun’s proposal to allow members of Lord Moon’s heavenly court to enter the domain. However, even having been granted this permission, they were still forbidden by Lady Sun to enter the Empire’s cities without being granted access by an authority under her purview. Ryoshun gained this by striking a bargain with an Imperial Magistrate from the Yasuki family who had been assigned to oversee the Damasu domain under Tsume rule, and so the moon cult began to spread.

Nanube – the Deceiver or the Liar:

Lord Moon’s heavenly court is raucous and keeping his celestial nobles from each other’s throats requires care and attention. To this end, Lord Moon assigned his servant Nanube to be his court entertainer and bid her to distract and divert his other servants with entertaining tales and confusing lies. Nanube was unlike any other being in the heavens – quick-witted and clever, she had a silver tongue that could charm even the most skeptical of beings. She could spin a tale like no other, and her lies were so convincing that even the gods themselves were fooled.

Nanube’s characteristic approach to influencing Lord Moon’s other servants is to spin tales related to their conflicts and weave in subtle references to the circumstances of their present strife. This frequently involves making up stories about the other beings involved, and fabricating details which cast their actions in a different light. Lord Moon looks on approvingly, for he understands that lies can help forge bonds that truth never could.

Disciples of Nanube are able to use deception not merely to conceal their own thoughts, but to influence others and take control of social situations.

Goju – the Hunter or the Tracker:

When the world was new, wild spirits roamed creation sowing chaos. Lady Sun set about assigning names to all of the beings in the celestial heavens and in the mortal realm under heaven. Lady Sun’s heavenly court was obedient, and her subjects accepted the names which she assigned. However, Lord Moon’s subjects were more rebellious, and many of them refused to be bound by the names which would constrain their shape and nature.

These spirits raced between the realms, as their names trailed behind them, following along the connection created by Lady Sun when she assigned their names. Lord Moon selected his servant Goju to chase down these servants, following their trails and trapping them in place long enough for their names to catch up so they could be bound. It took ages for Goju’s work to be complete, in which time he became the greatest hunter and tracker in all of creation. The craftiest of the nameless spirits are still said to race through creation, never staying anywhere long enough to allow their names to catch up with them, and always staying well-hidden to evade the watchful gaze of the heavens.

Disciples of Goju learn to recognize the rhythms and balances of the world, seeing all things in their place and all things out of their place.

Suro – the Thief or the Taker:

In the beginning there was Nothing, and Nothing was lonely. Nothing’s desire for companionship created the first third of existence. However, Nothing became afraid of what it had done, and that fear created the second third of existence. Eventually, Nothing came to regret what it had done, and this regret created the final third of existence.

After this occurred, there remained a little piece of Nothing, unnoticed in the darkness of the night sky. If you glimpse a place between the starts blacker than the emptiness of the night, that is the shadow of Nothing. This shadow was found by a celestial being named Suro, who claimed it and learned to wield its power to remain unseen and unnoticed when he wishes. His exploits became legend among the celestials of the daytime and nighttime realms.

However, all of the things in the night sky belong to Onnotangu, and when Lord Moon heard that one of his servants had claimed some unknown power for themselves, he had Suro brought before him. Suro denied having taken anything from Lord Moon’s night, but he was not believed. Onnotangu called upon his consort, in whose court truth has power and whose servants can see and compel truthspeaking. It is unknown what price Lord Moon paid for this service, but his pride could not permit a member of his court to steal such power without paying him tribute.

Upon being brought before Lord Moon and demanded to account for what he had stolen under divine compulsion to speak only truth, Suro declare that he had taken Nothing. And so he was set free, and Lord Moon’s wrath was turned upon the members of his heavenly court who had spread false rumors, but Suro requested that Lord Moon declare that none should suffer as a consequence of this matter, and Lord Moon granted his request as the aggrieved party.

Thus it came to pass that even after the source of Suro’s power later became known, Lord Moon’s decree that none should suffer continued to protect Suro, as punishing him would violate that decree, and Lord Moon’s decree are absolute in the realm of night.

Disciples of Suro learn to call upon the power of the Shadow of Nothing by beseeching Suro to share this power with those who serve him. In the days before the Empire, this was done openly by those to the south of the Spine of the World mountains who later swore fealty to Bayushi, founder of the Scorpion clan. The Order of Lord Moon knows that the high priestess who was chosen by the Shinsei as the Scorpion clan Thunder chose her name in honor of Suro, which is why she was known as Shosuro. Indeed, after the defeat of Fu Leng, it was Shosuro alone who returned with the Black Scrolls, and though she died of her wounds shorly after, it was surely the power of the Shadow whose power allowed her to be the last surviving Thunder.

Here's a story told about Nanube by the Teacher of the Astral Ways during a full moon ceremony:

No Answer to Believe

Many centuries ago, Nanube the Deceiver arrived in Lady Sun's court as an emissary, with no announced mission.

She spent considerable time there, getting to know the members of Lady Sun's celestial administration, and learning the ways of the Realm of Day.

Eventually Nanube requested an audience with Lady Sun.  She explained to Amaterasu the true hidden purpose of her visit.  That Lord Moon desired a Shard of Pure Sunlight, undiluted such that only Lady Sun can provide, to remind him of her presence when they are apart.

Nanube explained that Lord Moon was too proud to admit that he desires such a thing, and that he would never express such vulnerability himself, never make such an admission of need.  Nanube was sent, therefore, to attempt to determine which members of Lady Sun's celestial administration might be bribed, coerced, or corrupted into helping him obtain what he seeks.

However, Nanube explained that she now realized that members of Lady Sun's court are too pure and honest to be subordinated in this way, and therefore there are no lies that even Nanube the Deceiver could tell which would achieve her objectives.  Thus, with all possible lies having failed before they could even be told, she could only tell the truth.

And the truth is that while a Shard of Pure Sunlight is a thing easily created by Lady Sun, and therefore Lord Moon should be more than capable of bargaining for it, his stubborn pride will never allow him to admit the vulnerability he feels, or the loneliness and aching need for his consort when they are apart.  And even worse, if Lady Sun did feel generous enough to offer a shard of her sunlight as a gift given freely, that same stubbornness would prevent Lord Moon from ever admitting how moved he was by the gesture, or how meaningful the gift was to him, even as it warmed his cold heart in lonely night.

Lady Sun was so overcome by this rare honesty from Nanube, and by the feelings of her husband, that it was with tears in her eyes that she brought forth the shining shard of pure sunlight, presenting it to Nanube in a crystal orb.  "No matter any reward, or even any appreciation for this gift - tell my husband that I give this to him freely, with warmth and love."

Nanube hesitated.  "My Lady Sun, your husband may be so prideful that if I tell him this, he may reject the gift, or be too self conscious to allow himself to enjoy its presence by his side.  I fear I shall need to invent some convincing lie for how I obtained this - but I promise you that I will ensure that my Lord Moon accepts it and treasures it."

Lady Sun frowned.  "Nanube, in the time you have spent with us, you have seen the purity and virtue of my realm, and witnessed my generosity.  Will you not consider turning away from your life of lies and deceptions, and embrace truth and honesty?

Nanube laughed.  "My Lady Sun, is there any answer I could give that you would believe?"

"I suppose not," replied Lady Sun, dismissing Nanube from her presence.

Nanube returned to Lord Moon's Court, presenting Lord Moon with Lady Sun's gift.  "Excellent!" beamed Lord Moon, who handed the orb of pure sunlight to Goju.  "This shall be of great help to Goju in his hunt - the Hikarikage has indeed been a most troublesome prey.  Tell me, what did my wife ask in return?  A Stardust Bloom?  The use of the Tidebringer's Covenant?  That I return the Evening's Sigh to her?"

Nanube shook her head.  "I told you, my Lord, that those things would be unnecessary, and that Lady Sun would provide a Shard without asking anything in return.  Though I did expend considerable resources bribing certain members of her court."

Lord Moon frowned.  "What members of Lady Sun's administration were you able to tempt, Nanube - and to what purpose?"

Nanube laughed.  "My Lord Moon, is there any answer I could give that you would believe?"

"I suppose not," replied Lord Moon, dismissing Nanube from his presence.

(end of story)

Here is a different story of Lord Moon (and Lady Sun), this one told by Soshi Saibankan during his time as an Imperial Magistrate.  The story is part of a transcript of a famous Saibankan ruling, to give an idea of how he talked. Many magistrates to this day model their own rulings after Saibankan’s way of speaking.

Here are the facts of this case:

→ Kakita Masao and Matsu Asahi were drinking in the same restaurant in Otosan Uchi.

→ Both men were very drunk, but Asahi had arrived much earlier and was therefore significantly more intoxicated.

→ The two of them exchanged words and ended up insulting one another, which led to a drunken fight.

→ Asahi was widely understood to be the superior fighter, being a veteran and accomplished duelist, while Masao was still young and inexperienced. However, despite being drunk himself, Masao knocked Asahi unconscious, probably due to the older man’s heavier intoxication.

→ Masao proceeded to brag to the entire bar that Asahi was lucky that this was merely a brawl and not a real duel, declared himself the superior fighter, proclaiming that in any real duel he would have surely killed Asahi.

→ Asahi challenged him to a duel to the death the next day, in repayment for the insult. Masao apologized profusely, publicly said he knew Asahi was the superior opponent, and begged Masao to pretend that he had never said those things. Asahi petitioned the Office of the Emerald Champion to have a magistrate rule that Masao must accept his challenge.

→ Masao argued that they were both drunk, that he had apologized and publicly set the record straight, and that even if a duel was warranted, it should be to submission rather than to the death. Masao declared that he was happy to submit to a superior opponent, possibly after simply seeing his opponent show his stance, if indeed Asahi turned out to be as skilled as his reputation suggested.

Here was Saibankan’s ruling, in which he characteristically told a fable and then explained how it informed his ruling:

When the blood of Onnotangu (Lord Moon) mixed with the tears of Amaterasu (Lady Sun) in the dust of the earth, the mixture created the human race. During this time, the two of them discussed how to shape the human creatures they had created. However, Lord Moon was still wounded from his fight with their son Hantei, leaving him unable to override any of his consort’s wishes.

“These humans should draw their strength from acting alone, and those who stand together should scatter helplessly before those who go their own way,” suggested Lord Moon.

“No,” replied Lady Sun. “They shall be stronger together, and draw strength from family and hierarchical order.”

“Then they should be at their best when acting on impulse, and letting their passions rule,” suggested Lord Moon.

“No,” replied Lady Sun. “They should benefit from study and practice, and those among them who act from reason and wisdom shall prevail.”

“Then those who do win should despise their enemies,” suggested Lord Moon, “and the nobility of victors shall be shown by the contempt they display for their defeated opponents.”

“No,” replied Lady Sun. “The most noble among them shall hold the skill and prowess of their enemies in high regard, bettering themselves by cultivating the admirable traits even of those who oppose them.”

“But you shall leave nothing of me in these humans,” complained Lord Moon. “Do you wish to see them move through the world without any of my will reflected in them? I know you wish them to be creatures of order and harmony, but would it not make you sad to see their world bereft of my influence?”

“Very well,” replied Lady Sun. “So long as order and harmony and wisdom and respect make them stronger, and as long as they know this, I will allow you to shape some aspect of their nature.”

“In that case,” said Lord Moon, “it shall be exactly as you say. They shall always be stronger together than apart. They shall benefit from study and practice. They shall be improved when recognizing the greatness contained even in their most hated enemies. Those among them who keep themselves ordered and obedient shall prevail over the chaotic and impulsive. And they shall know all of this about themselves. I shall not alter any of this with my influence.”

“Then how shall you affect their nature?” asked Lady Sun.

“I shall give them an instinctive desire that none of this should be true,” answered Lord Moon. “They shall know what is best, but yearn for things which contradict their understanding.”

Lady Sun considered this. She understood that mortal man would rise to even greater heights if she did not allow Lord Moon to burden them with impulses contrary to their interests. But she also understood that her consort was right, and it would sadden her greatly for their mortal children to have nothing of her lover’s influence. So she agreed to his request, and thus humanity came to its present condition.

With that in mind, let us consider the factors at play in this case. Both men were drunk and behaved on impulse rather than considered action. However, does this matter? A samurai owns every word he speaks. And while we may often need to act in an instant, the years of training which precede those instants is what separates untrained fumbling from expert skill. So too do we train ourselves to honorable conduct, so that we may not stumble even in our least guarded instants.

Thus, the conduct of both men should be judged without consideration for their inebriation, and Asahi’s challenge to Masao is legitimate and must be answered. And so we must consider the nature of the duel, specifically whether it must be fought to the death. We’ve have already established that the particulars of this exchange should determine this answer, including the specific words used by each man, no matter how drunk they were.

Masao is attested by several witnesses to have specifically said that he would “kill” his opponent in “any duel”. He is now asking for a duel in which no one will be killed. If he wanted this outcome, then he should have displayed more respect, both for his opponent and for his own words. Indeed, it is important for all humans to understand our own nature, that we should cultivate proper attitudes and habits in ourselves. For we all have within us baser impulses which must be overridden through willpower and discipline, and we court disaster when we forget this.

Magistrates and judges must always keep this tension in the forefront of our minds. Masao has told the court what was in his heart, what he intended to convey to his audience, and has apologized for the ways in which his intentions differed from what he actually said and did. And indeed, any magistrate must weigh the intentions of all parties. But people must be reminded at all times that words and actions may not be taken back, and that they will be judged based on what they have said and done. Masao’s intention was clearly to express dominance, and the particulars of his words allow for only one possible response.

Indeed, one error that both men have made here is in asking for me to use my judgment and apply my discretion to do what is right. But the particulars of this case allow for no other ruling than that Masao must answer Asahi’s challenge, and fight him to the death.

(end of ruling)

Here's another story about a member of Lord Moon's court - this one is about Goju:

Shattered Names and Stubborn Pride

Lord Moon may summon any being who dwells in the night sky by speaking their name.  And while many sought to deny their place by racing ahead of the names they were assigned, nearly all such creatures were tracked and snared by Goju the Hunter.  The only prey to escape being bound by their own names rebelliously fled the Celestial Heavens entirely, and even most of these were eventually caught by Goju.

Some who raced ahead of their own names, refusing to have their nature shaped and constrained, turned to strike at the names that followed them.  Many of these creatures became the Namebroken, having split their names in two.

The Hikarikage was perhaps the most troublesome of the Namebroken.  A creature of light and shadow, it could shed half of its nature at will.  When Lord Moon decreed the Hikarikage present itself before him, that he might bind it to his service, it would set aside half of its name to avoid being summoned.  Goju failed again and again to bind the Hikarikage - when he illuminated its location it would change itself into a creature of light to blend in, and when he cast darkness upon the area so that it might stand out, it changed into a shadow.  If Lord Moon had not gifted Goju with a Shard of Pure Sunlight given by Lady Sun herself, the Hikarikage might have never been caught.

But even more dangerous than the Namebroken were those who struck their names so defiantly as to shatter them into their component pieces.  And the most dangerous of the Nameshattered was the Reikodokiri.  Intended as a being of cold, silent mist, the individual syllables of the the Reikodokiri's name were quite powerful - it could make itself into a "Kiko" - small spirit - to hide away, and as a "Reido" it could apply the cold ways of Lord Moon's cleverness to evade capture.

One day, the Reikodokiri stumbled upon the Kakurekame - the hidden turtle - as it swam through the river of heaven.  Being ravenous from the ages spent in hiding, the Reikodokiri devoured the Kakurekame, and found to its surprise that it could now form itself into a Kakureidokame, swimming unseen through the river of heaven, cleverly hiding itself in its cold currents.  And when Goju finally discerned the creature's new form and carefully strung the celestial cords of his Star-Knotted Net to ensnare the beast, it shed the Kakurekame name and slipped through as a Reikiri - a being as insubstantial as cold mist.

Having now realized the power it could gain by consuming the names of its victims, the Reikodokiri became a terror of the realm of night, embodying the essences of its prey, changing into many forms and shedding them at will to evade its pursuers.  In response to fearful petition from his subjects, Lord Moon asked Goju what he would require to capture this latest terror of the night, and promised that the resources of the court were Goju's to use as he saw necessary.

Lord Moon would have mustered all the forces of the realm and placed them under Goju's direction, but Goju requested only a single warrior - Keninchujin - whose strong loyal blade had stubbornly refused to ever accept defeat at the hands of any foe, and the Sutra of the Black Origin, which had tethered many unwary spirits through the eons.

After following the trail of destruction left by the Reikodokiri, Goju arranged the sacred scrolls of the sutra, whose black ink flowed like liquid shadow, and instructed Keninchujin to stand prepared to unfurl them.  "If I am right," said Goju, "after I flush out our quarry, this trap I have set will surely ensnare it."

But then, when Goju set about his work, and returned to the sutra, he found that the precise geometric patterns of the scrolls had been swept aside, and Keninchujin broken and eaten.  Even worse, swelling with the newfound strength and sharpness of the name it had eaten, the Nameshattered creature now turned to face Goju, eyeing him hungrily, no longer afraid.  "Fool!" it said, in a cold, quiet voice, "You have made me stronger than I have ever been.  Have you not learned from my past escapes that I could not be so easily caught?"

"If I am right," replied Goju, "Then you have been caught.  The loyalty to Lord Moon embodied by Keninchujin, and encoded in his very name, will ensure that when Lord Moon next declares a summons, you will answer him, and he will bind you to his service, and you will carry out his wishes."

"Pfaw," hissed the Nameshattered creature, "I will simply abandon this name, and Keninchujin's loyalty along with it."

"No," declared Goju.  "The particular stubbornness you now possess, also encoded in Keninchujin's name, will never allow you to abandon the strength that you have come to prize so highly.  You cannot be free of Keninchujin's power without also letting go of the greatest strength you will ever possess, and the stubbornness of Keninchujin would never permit that."

The Nameshattered creature stood frozen, realizing that Goju spoke true.  With growing fury, seeing that there was no escape from a life of servitude, it launched itself snarling at Goju, gathering all of its newfound strength.

Goju barely seemed to move, but it halted its forward motion the instant it felt Goju's obsidian blade at its throat.

"If I am right," said Goju, "you will be far too valuable a servant to my Lord Moon for him to ever order me to find you and take your life."  And then Goju grinned, a smile so wolfish and predatory that his prey stumbled backwards in fear. "But I pray that I am wrong."

(end of story)

Here is the final story about the members of Lord Moon's heavenly court - this one is about both Suro and Ryoshun:

Balance Exploited, Balanced Defended

In the vast tapestry of the heavens, there came a time when Suro the Thief was finally able to visit the Realm of Day. He was granted leave by both Lord Moon and Lady Sun to converse and trade with the inhabitants of the luminous domain, with the caveat that he be monitored and searched to ensure he did not leave with anything that did not belong to him.  As he always did when making this journey, Suro gathered a collection of star-metal coins - treasures of the night sky, forged where the light of Lady Sun did not reach.  Imbued with the chilling essence of the nocturnal realm, the coins shimmered like frost in the deepest night and were colder than any earthly winter.

Ryoshun the Guardian, as ever, stood guard at the threshold between the realms, allowing only those with rightful permission to depart.  "I see you embark once more to Lady Sun's domain," Ryoshun remarked, his gaze steady.

"Indeed," Suro replied with a sly smile. "I expect a successful negotiation on this visit, for something worthy of our Lord Moon's realm."

Ryoshun inclined his head ever so slightly. "Perhaps eventually, Suro - but I'd wager, not this time."

Suro crossed the threshold with a chuckle. "We shall see, old friend."

As Suro entered the domain of Lady Sun, he marveled at the brilliance that surrounded him as he moved like a shadow through the radiant sky.  He first visited Kagutsuchi, the Keeper of the Sunfire Forge, who looked with professional interest at the craft of the forged star-metal that Suro displayed.  But when he took the proffered coins for inspection, their stinging coldness was so unpleasant that he eventually set aside his fascination at their construction, handing them back to Suro, politely declining to exchange so much as a meager Flame Dagger for the cold coins.

So too it went with Hikarimitsu, the Mistress of Purity for the Solar Gardens.  Initially intrigued by how the coins might influence the balance of the elements needed to produce a new Celestial Bloom, she finally concluded she could bear their touch no longer and courteously bid him good luck in using the cold coins to purchase suitable wares.  But in truth, there was no such luck to be had.  Suro would bow, charm, and place his shimmering coins in the hands of artisans of light, scholars of warmth, and merchants of pure energy.  Yet none were willing to trade for his cold treasures, not the Daylight Attendants, or the Harbingers of Dawn - even the Radiant Ministers found the luster of the star-metal coins was not worth tolerating their sucking coldness.

And so once again Suro's visit came to an end, as he returned to the threshold empty-handed.  Before departing, he submitted himself to Omoikane for inspection.  Under the watchful gaze of such a powerful kami of discernment, even Suro himself could not hope to leave with any object which did not belong to him.  Satisfied that Suro carried nothing but his star-metal coins, Omoikane allowed him to pass to where Ryoshun waited, greeting his old friend, his face inscrutable.

One cycle, after many such journeys, Suro approached Ryoshun with a new request.  "I have been granted permission to visit the mortal realm," he announced.  "Lord Moon wishes me to spread his influence upon the earth below.  I shall bring my coins; perhaps the denizens of the elemental world will be more receptive."

Ryoshun regarded Suro thoughtfully as he closed shut the passages with an application of his will.  "Perhaps eventually, Suro - but I'd wager, not this time."

Suro blinked, surprised.  “You would deny me passage?  I have Lord Moon’s permission.”

Ryoshun remained still, his eyes unwavering as he spoke. “You do indeed, but I have watched closely.  Your star-metal coins are warm now, infused with the stolen heat and energy of Lady Sun's domain.  They carry within them now the strength of those that touched them in her realm.  You did not take any object from the Realm of Day, but you have stolen some of its warmth.  Even now I see Kagutsuchi massaging his aching hands over the heat of his forge, and Hikarimitsu shivering even in the warmth of her gardens.”

A slow smile spread across Suro's face. "It seems nothing escapes your watchful gaze, Ryoshun.  But what of it?  Perhaps Lord Moon himself would approve of such a subtle theft.”

“Perhaps,” replied Ryoshun. “But your leave is to spread the influence of Lord Moon in the mortal realm, not the power of his consort. The warmth you have stolen does not belong to our lord, and thus, these altered coins would upset the balance between night and day, a balance I am sworn to protect. Therefore, I cannot allow you to pass."

"Very well," Suro conceded. "I shall return and leave the coins behind before I descend to earth."  He turned to go, but then glanced back with a chuckle. "But we shall see, old friend, what will happen now that I have reason to sneak past you.  Perhaps I will simply find another way to the mortal realm, one that eludes even your sight."

Ryoshun’s gaze met his, calm and certain.  “Perhaps eventually, Suro - but I’d wager, not this time.”

(end of story)





SOOTHSAYING:

As mentioned above, various omens and portents in the Karmic Inqusitors campaign should have foretold of the kumosaya fungal blight.  Let's talk about omens and portents in Rokugan, and how they are understood as tools of soothsaying.

Although “soothsaying” literally means “truth-speaking”, the word colloquially refers to predicting the future. Soothsaying has 2 categories, which split into 4 disciplines, which divide into 8 forms, which are composed of innumerable different practices.  Here's the opening that people read when opening the book "On Soothsaying":

"This book was originally published by Isawa Akuma, who was later discovered to have stolen it from the Great Library. It’s true authorship is unknown. Anyone who discovers a copy of this book without this disclaimer is ordered to report it to the office of the Jade Champion."

The above disclaimer is at the front of several books published by Isawa Akuma many centuries ago, including this one. Akuma was a powerful shugenja who was also the greatest scholar of his generation, which is unusual since it’s practically unheard of for masters of magic to also be masters of scholarship. However, it later turned out that Isawa Akuma had used his great name to summon an oni lord (Oni no Akuma), who took the form of a Great Library hidden deep in the Isawa Woodlands. This library is said to contain “all of the things which have ever been written, and many of the things which never were written, and more than a few things which will come to be written”. It cannot be found the same way twice, and therefore is very difficult to reach.

Akuma published a number of works of scholarships written by people who were never born, or possibly which would have otherwise not come to be written for centuries, attributing these works to himself, which fueled his name even further. Notably, Akuma is only one of two shugenja in history capable of practicing maho and thus taking on the Shadowlands taint without losing their shugenja abilities – the taint is hateful to the elemental kami and all other shugenja who have practiced maho have lost their powers as a result. Akuma is one of only three shugenja who has achieved immortality, though presumably he did this though dark rituals rather than gaining the favor of the kami.

"On Soothsaying" is still considered the foundational work of scholarship on the subject of augury and prophecy, despite its origins, which speaks to its quality.

Here's a high-level description of the breakdown of soothsaying's 2 categories, 4 disciplines, and 8 forms:

-> Soothsaying: the general term for all the different ways of predicting the future
  --> Augury: the general category of soothsaying, identifying and interpreting universal omens and portents
    ---> Fortunetelling: predicting a specific, individual person’s future
      ----> Astrology: not only the reading of the stars, but the placing of observed events within the framework of the calendar and its holy days, and the horoscopes of the people involved (“horoscope” includes matching someone’s “place” in their family/village/class/etc to their plans and goals, and doesn’t only refer to the date, year, and time of day in which they were originally born)
      ----> Augural readings: performing specific actions in order to generate results which can be interpreted, e.g. reading tea leaves, I Ching readings, interpreting dreams, etc
   ---> Divination: predicting larger events not tied to individual people, e.g. harvests/plagues/floods/etc
      ----> Prognostication: interpreting omens and portents and making predictions about how they foretell coming events for a large area and population
      ----> Oracular divination: similar to taking augural readings, this involves performing actions such as disembowling a chicken in order to read its entrails, or scrying by performing a crystal gazing to view an area and read the distortions of light and shape which are revealed, etc
  --> Prophecy: the specific category of soothsaying, in which “supernatural” predictions made by people gifted by the gods with special sight that lets them see different possible futures
    ---> Wisdom Prophecy: when a human is wise enough to be able to generate prophetic predictions on command
      ----> Devotion Prophecy: the human prophet focuses their second sight on some specific aspect of the future – this offers more control but suffers the limitations of the human mind
      ----> Channeling Prophecy: the human prophet asks a god to possess them so they can see with the god’s sight – this is more powerful but often focuses on what is important to the god rather than what humans might wish to see
    ---> Covenant Prophecy: the prophet forges a compact or receives a promise from a divine being with its associated terms and conditions
      ----> Sentinel Prophecy: the god commits to providing warning signs in advance of some specific threat, e.g. Osawo Wo warns of possible fires in the city of Komori (on the Island of Spice in the Mantis Isles) by causing a red sky over the eastern ocean at dawn
      ----> Strategem Prophecy: a god has shared a plan with a human prophet, so that they may help ensure this plan comes to pass, e.g. the prophecy that the 3rd Imperial Legion should send The Dreamer, The Gambler, The Historian, and the Painter should a company and journey into the Shadowlands to reach the Forgotten Tomb on the day of the Chrysanthemum Festival, and that by doing so these warriors can gain power over the Shadowlands and win a great victory over the Dark Moto

Now here's what I have as the original introduction to the book "On Soothsaying":

Everyone sees into the future. Even simpletons understand that a rock thrown into the air is likely to fall back down. We make such predictions every minute of our lives.

Soothsaying is predicting that a rock will fall to earth without having known that one was thrown. It is predicting that a house will collapse without knowing how, why, or perhaps even when. It is having some understanding of what the future holds without possessing the facts which allow us to make such predictions in the ordinary way.

Just as all things divide into two complementary pieces, soothsaying comes in two different forms, augury and prophecy.

Seeing a spider in the morning means good luck. Hearing crickets cease their music signals danger. A red bird flying into your home foretells love. This is augury, the lore of the general form of soothsaying, which identifies universal omens and portents.

While augury is general, prophecy is specific. It is not merely predicting an event, but articulating its manifold possible forms, affected as they are by the innumerable choices made by mortals and gods alike. A prophecy, in essence, is not the foretelling of an immutable future, but a weaving together of a myriad of potential futures, each one hinging on the choices that give them life. They can be prevented, they can be realized, and most importantly they can be nudged in one direction or another. A prophecy can be as much a warning as a prediction, as much a caution as a certainty. Prophets who communicate such future possibilities practice two distinct disciplines: Wisdom Prophecy and Covenant Prophecy.

Prophetic vision of is not unrestricted – it is bound by the sheer complexity of possible futures. All things are connected to all other things – this is the Tao. The Shinsei saw the future of the Empire in his tea leaves, but even more impressive was that he did so without being driven mad, unlike most other prophets of great renown, whose glimpses into the interconnectedness of all things yield equal parts wisdom and madness.

Wisdom Prophets, therefore, must judiciously focus on areas where they have the most insight. Given the vastness of potential futures, a prophecy will never be comprehensive. The particular focus of prophetic vision aligns with the divine beings who granted the prophet their futuresight.

A prophet blessed by the Fortune Benten, for instance, might catch glimpses of future events as they pertain to the dance of hearts, the weaving and unweaving of relationships. Their insights will reveal the joy and sorrow of romantic entanglements, but they may falter when asked about matters of wealth, power, or more mundane concerns. In contrast, a prophet in the favor of Daikoku, the Fortune of Wealth, will see how fortunes rise and fall, how prosperity ebbs and flows across the landscapes of potential futures. They may foresee how choices made today might impact the coffers of tomorrow, yet remain blind to the subtleties of romance, or the shifting dynamics of bloodlines.

Wisdom Prophecy, thus, is a panorama painted in the hues of divine favor, a kaleidoscopic viewing glass through which the prophet discerns potential futures. Each prophet must find their focus within the vastness, must hone their vision along the axis of their divine benefactor. It is this specific gaze, this focused sight, that lends prophecy its power and mystery. Within this discipline, two unique forms unfurl – Devotional Prophecy and Channeling Prophecy.

Devotional Prophecy refers to a prophet’s ability to deliberately focus their second sight on the interplay of potential futures, ever-shifting with the choices of gods and mortals. Yet, it is essential to remember that the ability to divine the future does not come with unfettered access to all aspects of what lies ahead. The prophet, despite their divine gift, is bound by the staggering complexity of the future’s vast landscape. The act of prophecy is not simply an act of seeing, but an act of choosing – a selection process that requires the prophet to focus their gaze on specific aspects of the future.

This is where the unique characteristics of Devotional Prophecy truly shine. The divine axis, a gift from the divine benefactor, acts as a guide, helping the prophet to navigate the immense complexity of the future. Recall the gifts and limitations of prophets blessed by Benten or Daikoku, whose prophecies are focused on the realms of romantic entanglements or the fluctuations of wealth, respectively. Each prophet’s vision is attuned by their unique divine favor, providing a singular perspective into many possible futures.

Channeling Prophecy represents a more intimate form of divine communication, where a prophet becomes a vessel for a divine being, almost always a Fortune. The prophet calls upon their benefactor, inviting them to grant wisdom and even speak through them. This process bears some resemblance to divine possession, yet it typically doesn’t result in the prophet articulating direct words from the Fortune. More commonly, the prophet experiences visions or snippets of insight, fragments of a divine perspective that they must then interpret and convey.

In some respects, Channeling Prophecy is more potent than Devotional Prophecy. After all, it is the Fortune themselves who direct the prophet’s attention, showing what needs to be seen. The prophet is not merely observing the possibilities; they are glimpsing truths or trajectories that the divine deem essential. This direct involvement from the divine being can lend a weight and certainty to these prophecies that is harder to achieve through the personal exploration of Devotional Prophecy.

However, this potency comes with its own limitations. Unlike Devotional Prophecy, where the prophet exercises some level of choice in where to direct their gaze, in Channeling Prophecy the prophet has much less agency. The divine being sets the agenda, guiding the prophet’s visions according to their own divine will. Consequently, the prophet may have less control over the areas of future they inspect, and their second sight is heavily influenced by the interests and priorities of the Fortune providing the vision. This path offers powerful visions, but also a path that demands surrender to the will of the divine.

Covenant Prophecy represents a distinct relationship between prophet and divine entity, often a Fortune. This discipline of prophecy stems from a compact or understanding between the mortal and the divine. Due to its nature as a divine commitment, Covenant Prophecy stands as the more reliable prophecy discipline, provided the covenant remains intact. These carry a certainty that others lack, for the gods themselves have pledged their future actions, under two forms of covenants: Sentinel Prophecies and Strategem Prophecies.

Sentinel Prophecies emerges when a divine being agrees to provide advance warning of a particular threat. An enduring example is the pact between Osano Wo and the city of Komori, on the Island of Spice in the Mantis Isles. As part of this divine covenant, Osano Wo warns of impending fires by causing the sky to turn red at dawn. Thanks to this warning, the monks of Komori can alert the city’s inhabitants to exercise caution and prevent larger disasters. This covenant was established by Kumiko, the prophet who founded the Temple of Osano Wo in Komori, and has since served as an unyielding bulwark against calamity.

Strategem Prophecies often seem nebulous, especially when prophets leave instructions for plans to be carried out years or centuries after their death. Consider the famous prophet Isawa Kimiko communicating the intention of Suitengu, the Fortune of the Fishermen, to have “The Sailor” reach “each of his destinations” prior to each of the Five Gosechi Holidays in “the Year of Mourning”. It was not until Kaito completed his now-famous journey that his dreams were proven to have identified him as the one responsible for saving the monks of Shizuka’s Promontory and the Emperor’s future wife. Indeed, when Kimiko discharged her prophecy, it is likely that there were many possible men who could have been born into the role of “The Sailor”, and for all we know, Kaito was one of many living candidates who accepted his role by setting out on the journey in fulfillment of Suitengu’s covenent.

Despite their ambiguities, Strategem Prophecies hold an unerring promise: as long as those involved fulfill the prophecy’s terms, they can be certain the divine being will uphold their commitment, ensuring the prophesied future will come to pass. Covenant Prophecy, in both its Sentinel and Strategem forms, thus represents an extraordinary level of cooperation and shared destiny between the mortal and divine.

Still, the art of soothsaying is not a mere gift to those prophets kissed by the divine; it is also a skill, a discipline to be learned and refined. The universe is a scroll of enigmatic symbols, teeming with whispers of the morrow for those patient enough to listen. Augury, then, is a method to interpret these echoes, providing a lens through which to discern the subtle gestures of the cosmos hinting towards the yet-unfolded.

This craft of augury splits into two branches of disciplines, both hewn from the same trunk of universal omens and portents, yet diverging in their paths of study – fortunetelling and divination.

Fortunetelling is the leaf-level observation of the cosmic tree, where the winds of destiny are caught and interpreted for an individual’s fate. It is as personal as a fingerprint, intertwining the grand designs of the universe with the path of a single soul. Fortunetellers practice in two main forms: astrology and augural readings.

Contrary to popular understanding, astrology is not just about reading the stars, but also about contextualizing events within the rhythm of the celestial calendar, its holy days, and the personal horoscopes of those involved. Astrologers align their readings not only with the moment of a person’s birth, but with their position within their family, village, class, and society. Their analysis encapsulates both cosmic and societal positions, offering a holistic understanding of an individual’s life and goals.

Augural readings, on the other hand, anchor their fortunetelling in the tangible and mundane, utilizing everyday items and occurrences as their oracles. From tea leaves swirling at the bottom of a cup, the cryptic hexagrams of the I Ching, to the symbolic landscape of dreams, all become messages from the cosmos when interpreted through an augur’s trained gaze.

Divination, in contrast, scales to the heights of the cosmic tree. It transcends individual destinies and delves into the grand currents of existence, charting the collective ebb and flow of communities and nations. The questions divination seeks to answer are larger than any single life; they revolve around prosperity and famine, peace and conflict, bounty and plague. This practice divides into two principal disciplines: prognostication and oracular divination.

Prognostication is the art of reading omens and portents that presage broader events. Prognosticators study the world, interpreting phenomena such as birds’ flight patterns, the depth of winter’s snow, or the ferocity of a summer storm. They weave these signs into predictions about the future, estimating the bounty of a harvest or the risk of a looming disaster.

Oracular divination, meanwhile, involves more direct solicitation of the divine. Through specific rites and rituals, those trained as oracles can ask for and then subsequently interpret messages from the gods. Their practices range from examining the entrails of a sacrificed chicken to scrying with a crystal to interpret the distortions of light and form revealed within it.

Augury, then, is a means for ordinary men and women to listen to the whispers of the universe, to chart their path through the endless sea of potential futures. It is the art of attuning one’s mind to the cosmos, of deciphering the story told by the world around us, a narrative unfolding in every fluttering leaf, every star’s twinkle, and every dream’s tableau.

(end of introduction)





EXAMPLES OF OMENS AND PORTENTS:

Here are the 7 omens and portents which the Order of Daikoku was looking for in order to see whether there would be some kind of crop blight:

1) A "pillar of cloud": A strange and ominous cloud formation appears in the sky, perhaps taking the shape of a pillar or tower. The cloud should have been visible from a great distance and persisted for an extended period of time, heightening the sense of foreboding.

2) Dead rats appearing in public places: Large numbers of dead rats shoudl have started turning up in public areas, such as streets or markets. The rats might have appeared to have died without any apparent cause or be arranged in a peculiar pattern.

3) Strong winds in affected villages: A fierce windstorm sweeps through the region, causing widespread damage and destruction. In some cases, the wind might be localized to the affected villages, or it might be a more general phenomenon.

4) Prophetic dreams warning of the coming blight: People in the region begin having vivid and disturbing dreams about the crops being destroyed or overrun by a noxious growth. The dreams might be accompanied by a feeling of dread or a sense of foreboding.

5) Augural readings from divinations being performed to predict the coming crop: Those skilled in the art of divination perform readings to predict the quality and quantity of the upcoming crop. The signs and omens that they read could be interpreted in a variety of ways, but they should have pointed to the same grim conclusion of the harvest will be ruined by a blight or pestilence.  Yet this did not happen.

6) A blood rain: A strange and unsettling rain falling over the region, appearing to be colored red. The rain would usually be accompanied by an unusual smell or taste, and it might stain the crops and the earth. In Lion lands, a red rain is interpreted as a sign of impending disaster or a harbinger of war.

7) A long dry spell - this one actually did happen, and is the only omen to have given any hint about the kumosaya blight.  It's unclear why this and only this sign was given, while all of the others failed to happen.

These signs contrast with different omens and portents which might herald different types of disasters.  For example, the people of Toshi Ranbo worry about a city-destroying fire, and in addition to taking the usual precautions, their fortunetellers are on the lookout for the following:

1) Fire in the sky: A fiery or reddish hue might paint the sky - this can manifest as unusually intense and persistent sunsets, and in severe cases appears as an Aurora-like phenomenon in the north that appears even though Toshi Ranbo is far from the poles.

2) Unusual wildlife activity: Historically, abnormal behavior in animals is one of the most reliable signs of disaster.  In this case, a sudden increase in sightings of fireflies or salamanders within the city warn of coming fires, and in extreme cases birds normally seen around the city suddenly abandon their nests and leave the area.

3) Smoke on the wind: Without any apparent source, a faint smell of smoke present in the air at all times warns of fires yet to come.

4) Temperature rise: A noticeable increase in the temperature, far beyond what the season or weather would suggest, warns of the heat of the coming flames.  This could be gradual, but a sudden and unexplained spike in heat heralds the most devastating fires.

5) Divinations of fire: Diviners and priests might start pulling fire-related omens in their readings. They could be drawing lots related to fire, flame-themed I Ching readings, or seeing visions of burning buildings in their dreams or meditation.

6) Ashen rain: A grayish, ash-like substance sometimes falls during rainfall, giving an eerie and ominous feeling of a burnt aftermath.  This typically warns of fires in the provinces rather than in the city itself, though it is rarely safe to count on such precision when interpreting signs.

7) Strange flames: Fire might behave unusually, perhaps burning brighter and faster than normal. Torches or candles may ignite or extinguish spontaneously, and fires in hearths could burn with strange colors.  The Damasu Ministry of Rites maintains an almanac of the various ways this can manifest and what each of the possibilities portends.

Another set of examples would be that the people of Toshi Ranbo worry about the Drowned Merchant River flooding.

1) River's murmur: Interested locals are diligent in listening for the sound of the river changing subtly - if it becomes louder then that foretells the levels rising abruptly, and if the normal sounds are replaced by a murmur that sounds like whispers or cries then disaster is surely ahead.

2) Fish behaviour: Fish and other river-dwelling creatures could begin to act strangely. They might leap from the water more often, or be found dead on the river banks. Particularly large or unusual fish might be caught - a fish with multiple heads is a sure sign of difficult times ahead.

3) Water discoloration: The river might take on an unusual color.  A murky brown foretells stirred up sediment from increased water flow, and if the river becomes a deep, unnatural blue then disaster is certain.

4) Erratic weather: The region could experience unusual rainfall patterns. This could mean sudden, intense downpours, or persistent, drizzly rain over several days. The changes might be localized, or affect the entire region - the former indicates that the flooding will affect the northern fields and the latter suggests that the entire region will soon be underwater.

5) Divinations of Water: Those versed in divination might begin drawing lots related to water or experiencing water-themed visions. A characteristic dream might involve being swept away by a river, or walking through the city streets while the entire world appears to be underwater.

6) Blossoming river flora: Plants and flowers that grow by the river might bloom out of season, or grow larger than they normally do. In severe cases, new types of water-loving plants might suddenly appear.  If this occurs in places where there is not yet sufficient water to nurture and sustain them, then it is certain that the floodwaters are coming, and the plants have taken up residence where they will soon be at home.

7) Fog over the river: An unnatural, lingering fog might appear over the river, potentially even during the heat of the day. This is the physical manifestation of the river attempting to expand its reach.

As another example, here are the signs which the Damasu know to look for which warn of terrible outbreaks of disease which might ravage the city:

1) Insect behaviour: Swarms of insects, particularly those associated with decay and death such as flies or beetles, begin to gather in unusual places. Observers report an unsettling increase in their numbers, and in severe cases even the appearance of insects normally unknown in the region.

2) Unquiet spirits: Tales circulate of restless spirits sighted wandering after dark. These spectral figures appear sickly or diseased, perhaps even bearing marks of the coming illness.

3) The stench of sickness: A foul and unexplainable stench begins to permeate the air. Despite efforts to identify the source, the smell persists, evoking a sense of decay and disease.

4) Ailments in animals: Domesticated animals or city-dwelling creatures show signs of sickness. This could be beloved pets, or even urban wildlife like birds and rats. These creatures falling ill, especially en masse, is taken as a grim sign.

5) Divinations of sisease: Omens and divinations begin to suggest an impending health crisis. Priests might have dreams filled with images of disease and suffering, or those casting lots might repeatedly pull symbols associated with illness or death.

6) Aberrant blooms: Certain plants, particularly those traditionally associated with healing or disease, bloom out of season.

7) Faint whispers: A soft, continuous whispering sound can be heard in certain quiet parts of the city. Though the words are indistinguishable, the eerie sound is associated with the quiet spread of disease.





THE DAMASU DOMAIN:

The Karmic Inquisitors campaign takes place in Damasu lands, which we've mentioned a few times before.  Here's some setting information about Damasu lands.

DAMASU LINEAGES:

Each domain is ruled by a daimyo, who appoints a chancellary to offer advice and counsel. Each chancellor represents one of the noble families of the domain.

All samurai associate themselves with a notable ancestor who founded a lineage. In some cases these lineages date back to the original warriors who swore fealty to the Great Ancestors and their retainers. In Lion lands, members of each lineage are expected to be able to trace their family line back to Akodo or one who initially swore fealty to Akodo. In many cases, this will be the progenitor of the lineage, while in other cases the lineage will be named for a great samurai who was born later and whose glorious deeds resulting in the creation of a new political entity whose members are adopted into the lineage and whose descendants are later born into it.

Each domain usually has 5-10 major lineages which make up the majority of its samurai and who administer its government. The daimyo’s lineage is often referred to as the ruling lineage and always has the same name as the domain itself, e.g. the ruling lineage of the Damasu house is, unsurprisingly, the Damasu lineage.

Most domains have a handful of smaller lineages which are too minor to be granted a position in the House Chancellary, but whose members still proudly uphold the traditions of their family line. Sometimes such lineages grow sufficiently large and successful enough to be granted a seat on the chancellary, and other times existing lineages shrink or otherwise fall into disfavor and lose their seat. In general, lineages which make up at least 10% of a domain usually have seats in their local House Chancellary, and smaller lineages do not, though this is not a legal requirement and daimyo have absolute legal authority in their domains to promote or dismiss their retainers at their sole discretion.

Such changes most often happen during turbulent times, and the recent war and changes in Damasu lands (as explained on the Timeline) have caused many changes to the makeup of the Damasu’s lineages, which are now almost completely different than they were 15 years ago before the Tsume invasion.

Provincial and cosmopolitan lineages:

Some lineages are tied to the specific land and holdings they administer on behalf of their daimyo. For example, players who played in the Daidoji Raiders campaign may remember the Aki lineage.

After Daidoji swore fealty to Lady Doji at the dawn of the Empire, he helped conquer territory in her name. A local warlord named Aki saw the wisdom in accepting the gifts of civilization offered by the Empire, so he swore fealty to Lord Daidoji. To this day, the Aki lineage is a powerful faction of the ruling house of the Daidoji, and the Aki chancellor represents their interests on the Daidoji chancellary.

Most samurai from the Aki lineage live in the province of Akishi, and the provincial city of Akishi was the original seat of power of the warlord Aki even before he swore fealty to Lord Daidoji. The Aki lineage has administered the province of Akishi for over a thousand years, and in recognition of this loyalty, no Daidoji daimyo would dream of appointing a provincial governor of Akishi from any other lineage. This type of lineage is often referred to as a provincial lineage, in recognition of the lineage’s ties to a single province.

However, not all provinces are like Akishi, and not all lineages are tied to a particular province.

Many provincial cities in the Empire began as small county townships and grew over time, usually due some combination of normal population growth, favorable location along the Imperial roads, especially fertile farmland leading to local wealth, etc. In such cases, governorship of these provinces will generally be awarded by the daimyo, at the recommendation of the House Chancellary, based on a combination of the merit of the candidates and the usual political horse-trading of the house lineages.

Likewise, many lineages were established by those who distinguished themselves to their daimyo, who rewarded them with an appointment to the chancellary. In many cases, members of other lineages which have fallen into disfavor will clamor to marry or be adopted into this new lineage, and new lineages often end up being created specifically to reward and elevate specific members from some existing lineage. These lineages are not tied to any particular province, though they may lobby for their members to be appointed to administer counties and provinces when those positions come before the House Chancellary. Such lineages are often referred to as cosmopolitan lineages, which communicates that they are based in their domain’s capital.

These cosmopolitan lineages often have semi-hereditary government posts which they always occupy. For example, the Sasara lineage of the Ryusei domain (of the Mirumoto family of the Dragon clan) always holds the position of Minister of Rites, in recognition of their piety and mastery of proper religious doctrine. There are no laws or decrees to that effect, but once such a tradition has persisted for centuries, few samurai nobles would break with the past without an extremely compelling reason.

Provinces like Akishi which are administered by a provincial lineage are often called dynasty provinces. Provinces whose provincial governments are drawn from the domain’s various lineages based on merit and politics are known as stewardship provinces.

Old and new lineages of the Damasu:

Many, many of the original Damasu samurai died in the initial Tsume invasion, during the failed attempt to retake Toshi Ranbo, and then in 6 years of front-line fighting in the Lion/Crane war. As mentioned above, this makes the current set of makeup of Damasu lineages quite different from what it was before these events.

In particular, other vassal families of the Lion clan were eager to reward their own nobles with prestigious appointments in Damasu lands. This includes not only the new provinces which were conquered from the Crane clan, but also the new government posts in the Six Ministries in Toshi Ranbo which needed to be filled after the original Ministers were killed in the Tsume invasion.

This means that a large chunk of current Damasu samurai were born in other domains (mostly other Akodo domains), and its largest lineages are mostly made up of these “outsider” lineages.

Below is a list of the major lineages of the Damasu, ordered from largest to smallest.

The Damasu lineage:

The previous daimyo, Damasu Kojima, was killed when Tsume Retsu invaded Toshi Ranbo in 1117. At that time, his cousin Akodo no Damasu Chiho represented the Damasu House on the Imperial Chancellary, and thus was in Otosan Uchi when most of her family was killed in battle.

Her first husband, Damasu Haruto, was killed in the first failed siege to take back Toshi Ranbo in 1118. As the highest ranking member of the Damasu, Chiho claimed her right of succession when the city was retaken, and she is now remarried to Akodo Hiroki, the first cousin of Akodo Toturi. Her oldest child will by default become the next daimyo, though it is unclear whether Hiroki and the Akodo will attempt to push aside the eldest so that one of Hiroki’s bloodline would become the next daimyo of the Damasu.

Presumably the Damasu House Ministry of Retainers could compute the exact percentage of the Damasu lineage comes from what background, but a good rule of thumb is that the current Damasu lineage is divided into thirds:

→ A third are from the original Damasu lineage, e.g. people who were out in the provinces or in the capital of Otosan Uchi when the Tsume invaded.

→ A third are from other scattered lineages of the Damasu family which no longer exist, with all of their senior members having died in the war.

→ A third are from other Lion domains, who like Akodo Hiroki joined the lineage after the Lion clan retook the city of Toshi Ranbo. Most people from this third of the lineage were being rewarded with prestigious government posts, and if you ever meet an NPC from the Damasu lineage in such a respected position, they are almost certainly from this third of the lineage.

The Chura lineage

The Chura house is one of the other vassal families of the Akodo, and the Chura domain is directly to the west of the Damasu domain. They temporarily absorbed some of the Damasu provinces (Izumo and Higo) which the Tsume failed to conquer after taking Toshi Ranbo, and some of the counties of those provinces stayed with the Chura after the Akodo redrew its borders as a result of the Lion/Crane war.

The most favored and accomplished samurai from the Chura domain were granted positions in the new Damasu government, and they now make up a “new” Chura lineage in Damasu lands. This new branch of the Chura line is a provincial lineage of the Damasu, as they have been granted the holdings of the Damasu province of Yamagata, which was taken from the Tsume in the war.

The Hiyu lineage

The Hiyu house is one of the other vassal families of the Akodo, and the Hiyu domain is directly to the west of the Damasu domain.

Like the Chura lineage, the Hiyu rewarded their most deserving samurai with government posts, and this new branch of the Hiyu line is now also a provincial lineage, granted authority over the Suruga province, which was taken from the Tsume.

The Sei lineage

Akodo no Damasu Sei is from the ruling Akodo lineage of the Lion, and given that the Lion are such traditionalists it was somewhat shocking that Sei chose to invoke his right to declare himself the progenitor of a new lineage named for himself. Sei is not known to be a vain man, nor he does not fall prey to the vice of humility.

This choice is thought to reflect his unorthodox thinking – Sei is known for his study of the Tao of Shinsei, something most Akodo only begin to read if they live long enough to retire, and his piety led him to push for his sister Akodo no Damasu Chishin to become the new Damasu Minister of Rites.

The Sei lineage is also a provincial lineage, having been granted authority over the province of Shimotsuke after it was taken from the Tsume family.

The Kiyomi, Bian, and Uyo lineages

These are the three “cosmopolitan lineages” of the Damasu which still remain following the war. Although they are all smaller than the new lineages and also smaller than the “reconstituted” Damasu lineage, they each still boast many worthy samurai who have earned their positions in the new regime.

This worthiness has not translated into government posts, however, as most of those have gone to outsiders who joined the Damasu after the war. Not only are there few high-ranking posts in the Six Ministries occupied by members of these lineages, none of the provincial governorships were granted to these lineages.

The only Minister from these three “O.G.” lineages is Akodo no Damasu Kichiro of the Kiyomi lineage, who is Minister of Justice due to the Kiyomi always holding that position due to their longstanding reputation as worthy and virtuous magistrates. Like his family predecessors, Kichiro has sworn a vow of devotion to Saibankan above and beyond the normal oath of office taken by Minsters of Justice.

Smaller Damasu lineages

The above lineages are the 7 lineages represented on the Damasu chancellary. However, there are several smaller lineages, which I will list from most to least significant below.

The Riori lineage

The Riori are one of the founding lineages of the Damasu family, a provincial lineage which has administered the city and province of Owari for over a thousand years.

Owari was the Damasu province which bordered the Tsume before the war, and the fortress city of Owari was the only thing which stood between the Tsume domain and Toshi Ranbo, which Tsume Retsu bypassed in his sneak attack.

After the fall of the Damasu capital, the Riori lineage who staffed the provincial government were offered the chance to surrender and depart the Damasu domain to wag war later and told that if they did not accept this offer, they would be slaughtered to the last.

With the massive flooding cutting off all reinforcements, then-governor Akodo no Damasu Eisuke called upon the noble courage of the Riori lineage to resist with their very lives, and their successful defense of the city weakened the Tsume armies which would soon need to defend Toshi Ranbo in the following year, and because of his successful defense, the retaliating Akodo army was better positioned to cut off Tsume supply lines and allow the counterattack to not need to worry about a Tsume stronghold to their east.

Unfortunately, the Lion siege failed, and Eisuke was once again given the chance to surrender after the Lion army ceded the Damasu domain in disgrace. This time Eisuke accepted the Tsume offer of surrender, and called upon the wisdom of the Riori lineage to live to fight another day. The Riori were on the front lines of the Lion/Crane war, and many were killed laying siege to Tsume strongholds.

So many deaths have caused the Riori lineage to shrink to almost nothing, and if not for the noble traditions and deep filial piety of the surviving Riori, the lineage would surely have dissipated. Indeed, the lineage is currently held together by a small handful of surviving Riori elders, such as Eisuke, who has been promoted to the Damasu Minister of Revenue.

As long as the Riori lineage exists, they will always retain governorship of Owari, but only time will tell whether its scions will continue the Riori name or merge into another lineage.

The Taizo lineage

The Taizo lineage was previously one of the major lineages on the Damasu chancellary. The Taizo have fallen into disfavor due to having spoken out so harshly against the prophet Baiten, who proclaimed that the Day of Thunder was at hand. After the murder of the prophet was announced in Kyuden Akodo, Akodo no Damasu Tomoko publicly declared that this should put a stop to the nonsense talk, and that at least the Tsume family had finally done one worthwhile thing in their miserable existence.

After the Day of Thunder later occurred, and Baiten was proven correct, Tomoko was disgraced, and as the highest ranking member of the Taizo lineage, her influence reflected poorly on all who chose to continue to affiliate with the Taizo. When the Damasu domain was retaken, many Taizo samurai took the opportunity to affiliate themselves with other lineages.

The Taizo were a provincial lineage with authority over the province of Izumo, and initially it appeared that this would remain the case despite their severe losses during the war and their subsequent fall from grace, but the recent failure of Izumo soothsayers to predict the komosaya fungal blight has called this into question, casting further doubts on the future of the lineage.

The Nire lineage

This lineage had already fallen into obscurity long before the Tsume invasion, so its size and standing haven’t changed much over the past 15 years.

Akodo no Damasu Jirou is the ranking member of the lineage, who currently serves as the Minister of Works. Jirou was the younger brother to the previous Minister of Works (Damasu Akitaka, who was killed when the Tsume took Toshi Ranbo), and was initially passed over for any significant government posts after the war ended.

However, the new Minister of Works, Akodo Ippei, did such a terrible job that he was recently forced into retirement, and Jirou was brought in to clean up the mess.

There are small handful of other Nire serving in government posts around the Damasu domain. Not enough to make the Nire a significant political entity, but the number is still far higher than their tiny size and low status would suggest, which speaks to the proud traditions and good breeding of the Nire lineage.

DAMASU PROVINCES:

Now that we've talked about the people, let's talk about the provinces of the Damasu.

Prior to the Lion/Crane war, the Damasu domain consisted of 6 provinces. After Toshi Ranbo fell, they lost all but 2 of those provinces to the Tsume, but by the end of the war the Lion clan managed to reclaim all that they had lost and take 4 additional provinces from the Tsume domain.

The peace treaty which the Emperor helped negotiate stipulated a dueling tournament which determined the disposition of the 4 provinces which originally belonged to the Tsume. 20 duelists drawn from the Crane and Phoenix clans dueled 20 Lion duelists, and Lion victories resulted in the Lion retaining those provinces, while Lion defeats allowed the Crane to pay an enormous sum of money in exchange for retaining control of the province.

The Lion did well in this tournament, but the Damasu lost the Tango province in an the upset duel in which Doji Masayo killed the expected-to-win Akodo no Damasu Tsuo after showing up with the cursed sword Shitsuten.

The current Damasu domain therefore consists of their 6 original provinces plus 3 new Tsume provinces. The three new provinces have each been assigned to a lineage from a different Akodo family who helped retake the domain.

Owari

Owari means “tail-end” or “final stage,” and this province was on the border between Lion and Crane lands prior to the Lion Crane war. Owari is administered by the Riori lineage, and Governor Akodo no Damasu Eisuke successfully held the provincial city from the Tsume assault even after Toshi Ranbo was taken, surrendering the city only after the Lion counterattack failed.

While the Riori lineage has been reduced to a shadow of its former self in the aftermath of the Lion/Crane war, the Riori have been restored as custodians of Owari, and Eisuke’s daughter Akodo no Damasu Gisako has been appointed the new Owari governor.

Mino

Mino means “beautiful swamp,” and it was the flooding of the Mino province that prevented Akodo reinforcements from being able to defend the city after Tsume Retsu took it in a surprise attack in 1117.

Bizen

Bizen means “preparation before,” so named because this is the province containing the canal which links Toshi Ranbo to the Drowned Merchant River.

Hitachi

Hitachi means “ever-present land”, and this is the province directly to the southeast of Toshi Ranbo, containing the fertile farmland not directly connected to the Drowned Merchant river or its canals. Because this is in the prestigious direction of Otosan Uchi, many nobles maintain their country estates in this province, especially in the county directly next to Toshi Ranbo, Hikobayashi.

Higo

Higo means “fat later” or “abundant harvest,” due to its fertile lands along the Drowned Merchant River. This is one of the two provinces which the Lion clan retained, and until recently it had been absorbed by the neighboring Chura domain.

Izumo

Izumo means “cloud-exiting,” and the soothsayers of Izumo have long studied the movements of the clouds, noting the ways in which the summer winds blow from southeast to northwest, while the winds of winter blow from the northwest to the southeast. “Pillars of cloud” seen in this province have always heralded either great fortune or coming disaster according to the seasons in which they appear – until this past year in which they failed to give any indication of the coming fungal blight.

Izumo was one of the 2 provinces never taken by the Tsume, and like Higo it was absorbed by the neighboring Chura domain before being returned to the Damasu when the Lion retook Toshi Ranbo.

Izumo has historically been a “dynasty province” held by the Taizo lineage, but after their recent failure to predict the fungal blight their standing has once again been called into question and it is unclear which of the Damasu lineages will get the next provincial governor of Izumo.

Yamagata

Yamagata means “mountain shape,” and this is one of the former Tsume provinces, from which the northern mountains can be seen. This province was won in a duel in which Matsu Yokijiro defeated the acclaimed duelist Doji Reju. The provincial government of Yamagata is staffed mainly by the new Chura lineage.

Suruga

Suruga means “swift-flowing river” or “fast horse,” and this is indeed where the waters of the Drowned Merchant River flow most quickly down from the mountains to the north. This province was won by Matsu Kenji, who was previously banished as a ronin but recently redeemed himself through unknown deeds and thus was available to fight on behalf of the Lion clan and narrowly defeat the formidible duelist Shiba Katsuda. The provincial government of Suruga is staffed mainly by the new Hiyu lineage.

Shimotsuke

The name means “lower field” or “lower plain,” was the southernmost province in Tsume lands, and was won by Akodo Mikio, the personal yojimbo to Akodo Toturi, who killed the greatest surviving Tsume duelist, Tsume Kigura. (Their previous best surviving duelist, Tsume Koreshiba, was killed in a duel with Kakita Kenji shortly before the start of the Lion/Crane war, forcing former Governor Yasujiro to step down and Tsume Momoko to be appointed.) The provincial government of Shimotsuke is staffed mainly by the new Sei lineage.

DAMASU TEMPLES:

Since the PCs are members of the Brotherhood of Shinsei, let's talk about the significant temples in Damasu lands.

When the Shinsei was advising the Hantei on the new Empire being created, part of his guidance was the identification of the 7 Major Fortunes whose favor would bring good luck and prosperity to humanity:

Fortune	Domain
Benten	The fortune of romantic love
Bishamon	The fortune of strength
Daikoku	The fortune of wealth
Ebisu	The fortune of honest work
Fukurokujin	The fortune of wisdom and mercy
Hotei	The fortune of contentment
Jurojin	The fortune of longevity

The Shinsei further recommended that each clan cultivate 2 major Fortunes to be their patrons, ensuring that every city within the clan have a temple to each of their 2 patron Fortunes.

Clan	Patron Fortunes
Crab	Bishamon + Ebisu
Crane	Benten + Daikoku
Dragon	Hotei + Ebisu
Lion	Bishamon + Daikoku
Phoenix	Fukurokujin + Hotei
Scorpion	Benten + Jurojin
Unicorn	Fukurokujin + Jurojin

In the late 3rd century, Hantei the Tenth formalized the system of the Six Ministries, and along with it codified the requirement that each of the Empire’s cities contain a temple to each of its clan’s patron fortunes.

In addition to the required temples to Bishamon and Daikoku that every Lion city contains, there are two other significant temples in Toshi Ranbo. Each of the four major temples in the city is described in a section below.

The Temple of Bishamon

The Lion clan is most known for its formidable military prowess, and Bishamon is the most important Fortune to the Lion. With over 200 members living in the main temple complex in Toshi Ranbo, the Order of Bishamon is the biggest, richest, most influential temple in Damasu lands.

Under the Tsume administration the Order of Bishamon’s influence was minimal, but it was restored to its rightful position as most esteemed temple in the city with the return of the Damasu.

The Temple of Daokoku

Grand Abbot Okawa was the head of the Order of Bishamon in Scorpion lands. Although Daikoku is not one of the Fortune patrons to the Scorpion clan, the city of Ryoko Owari boasts the largest Temple of Daikoku in the Empire, and under Okawa’s decades-long leadership the temple began to spread its influence throughout Scorpion lands. Okawa himself was blessed with the gift of prophecy, and all who heard his sermons were changed by them.

Okawa was revealed on the Day of Thunder to be the descendant of Shinsei, and it was he who gathered together the Seven Thunders to defeat Shinjo Jotsu, Lord Moon’s Champion. This has spurred the Temple of Daikoku to even greater heights, and after the previous Grand Abbot of Daikoku for Damasu lands died, one of Okawa’s disciples was appointed.

It’s extraordinarily rare for an outsider to attain such a position, as temples in Damasu lands generally respect the previous Grand Abbot’s choice of a successor. However, out of reverence for the Prophet Okawa caused the previously designated successor renounced his claim to the position. It’s unclear to those outside the Order of Daikoku the extent to which this is voluntary, but it’s widely believed that not only did Akodo no Damasu Chishin strongly push for this in his capacity as the Damasu Minister of Rites, but that Akodo no Damasu Sei personally ordered him to do so as Chancellor of the Sei lineage.

Daikoku is a patron fortune of both the Crane and Lion clans, and thus this temple was “promoted” to the most esteemed temple under the Tsume administration, replacing the Temple of Bishamon under the Tsume Ministry of Rites during their occupation of Toshi Ranbo. It has since returned to a place of lesser prominence, as the Temple of Bishamon is once again ascendant.

The Temple of Sadahako

After the prophet Baiten was banished from Toshi Ranbo by the Tsume administration, the Crane clan brought in Grand Abbot Benshi to help heal the divisions this caused. Benshi was the Grand Abbot of Sadahako, the fortune of artists and entertainers, for all of Crane lands. See the Timeline for a longer explanation of these events.

After the murder of the prophet, the Order of Sadahako took on the continuation of Baiten’s ministry, and is still the fastest growing order in the Empire, as its missionaries spread Baiten’s words and wisdom throughout the Empire. While the Damasu dismissed Grand Abbot Benshi back to Crane lands, his disciples in the city have continued to carry on Baiten’s work through the Temple of Sadahako here. Although this temple receives comparably little government funding, it continues to reap large donations from the city’s non-samurai populace.

The Temple of Benten

There was no major Temple to Benten before the Tsume occupation, but the Crane clan established a major temple here in accordance with the Imperial direction that all cities in the Empire should have temples to each of their clan’s patron fortunes.

The Damasu administration have mainly left this temple alone, as they do not wish to offend Benten by deconsecrating her temple, but neither are they bolstering it with city funds. The temple itself remains a destination for those wishing to make an offering to Benten to ensure a good marriage for themselves or their children, but otherwise this temple has largely fallen into obscurity.





RELIC SEEKERS

During the Karmic Inquisitors campaign, the PCs tasked a large staff to look into "relic seekers" - i.e. pilgrims who come to the temple looking to pray before and even be granted private audiences with many Temple relics.  This page contains an alphabetically sorted list of all the people whose names are recorded as having:
* arrived in the past 2 and a half years
* have potentially been around for most or all of the intervening time
* are either still in the city or who at least may still be in the city now (in many cases this is known and in other cases it is unclear)

Note that while this list should be definitive for everyone from last year and the year before, many more recent pilgrims might not be on it.  There are many temple relics, such as the Pillar of Ten Thousand Names, which pilgrims may freely visit and even lay hands on, without needing to make special donations or be added to a waiting list.   Visitors may enter the Chamber of Celestial Echoes without being recorded and be just one face in the crowd - only those who wish to ascend the platforms to enter the Vault need request the priviledge.

Thus, many visitors to Toshi Ranbo spend months visiting the Temple, making donations, and visiting relics before they even decide to take the next step and put themselves in line for e.g. handling the Prayer Beads of the Guardian Spirits, or being able make a secret vow on the Sword of the Vanquished Warlord.  This list would be easily twice as long if it included everyone from just this year who is known to be interested in such things but has not made any overt attempts to gain access to the more restricted relics.

Similarly, this list would probably double in size again (i.e. 4 times its current size) if it were to include locals who eventually decided to become relic-seeking pilgrims.  This list includes e.g. Damasu samurai who came to Toshi Ranbo from elsewhere in the domain, but it excludes people who are known to have been living in the city for many years who only recently began to make a serious attempt to get personalized audiences with each temple relic.

Below is the alphabetical list which has so far been prepared - note that due to "Akodo" being early in the alphabet, the first collection of names on this list are the children of local Damasu samurai - typically through not always second children - who have recently passed their gempukku and thus are now eligible to come to the temple as relic seekers.

In the coming weeks, the monks tasked by the PCs to look into these people will follow up on each of them individually, investigating their living situations, whether they are still indeed in the city, speaking to their neighbors, and generally assessing whether there is anything suspicious or unusual about them, e.g. a samurai renting a cheap house in a laboror neighborhood would be a stunning and embarrassing fact which they surely would never have revealed to the Temple voluntarily.

h3. **Akodo no Damasu Akuhiko**

The eldest daughter of Damasu Tomoko, the Minister of Retainers for the entire Damasu domain, Akuhiko will be the highest ranking member of the Taizo lineage once her mother retires and she inherits that responsibility.

The Taizo lineage was previously one of the major lineages on the Damasu chancellary. The Taizo have fallen into disfavor due to having spoken out so harshly against the prophet Baiten, who proclaimed that the Day of Thunder was at hand. After the murder of the prophet was announced in Kyuden Akodo, Tomoko publicly declared that this should put a stop to the nonsense talk, and that at least the Tsume family had finally done one worthwhile thing in their miserable existence.

After the Day of Thunder later occurred, and Baiten was proven correct, Tomoko was disgraced, and as the highest ranking member of the Taizo lineage, her influence reflected poorly on all who chose to continue to affiliate with the Taizo. When the Damasu domain was retaken, many Taizo samurai took the opportunity to affiliate themselves with other lineages.

However, Tomoko’s talents and accomplishments during the Lion/Crane war are so indisputable that she was still appointed the new Damasu Minister of Retainers when the Lion retook the city, making her the highest ranking member of the diminishing Taizo lineage, a position which Akkuhiko will one day inherit even if the position of Minister of Retainers passes to another.

Akuhiko began seeking access to temple relics last year following her gempukku, as it would have been premature to do so before that time.

h3. **Akodo no Damasu Beni**

The second son of Akodo no Damasu Daitengu, Beni is unlikely to be involved in the courtly politics of his elders, but his mother is one of the "new guard" Damasu who Fukumi believes is working to supplant the current presumptive heir to the domain.

h3.  **Akodo no Damasu Genya**

Genya is the second son of Akodo no Damasu Eiji, the county magistrate of Hoshizora, where the PCs caught the horse thieves, and defeated a powerful bandit lord and his ninja retainer.

h3. **Akodo no Damasu Hoshiko**

The second daughter of Akodo no Damasu Masatoshi, the Governor of Mino, Hoshiko has come to the temple seeking wisdom - strength of mind and spirit rather than strength of muscle.  Her father is a courtier who wields considerable power in the Lion and Imperial courts - his brother is the Hiyu representative on the Imperial Chancellary, hence Hoshiko's mother becoming governor of Mino.

h3. **Akodo no Damasu Jinsei**

The second son of Akodo no Damasu Taro, Jinsei's father sent him to Toshi Ranbo after his gempukku the week before Setsuban last year to continue his training.  Believing that strength will be needed in the years ahead as peaceful relations with the Crane clan inevitably break down again, Jinsei has spent considerable time in the Temple of Bishamon praying before its holy relics, as well as testing himself in the city's many dojos.

h3. **Akodo no Damasu Maya**

Maya is the second daughter of Akodo no Damasu Fusanosuke, the governor of Higo, and a prominent "new guard" member of the Damasu lineage.  Like the others just past their gempukku, and as is common for second children, Maya has been sent to the Temple of Bishamon to train and study and pray and absorb the wisdom and power of Bishamon through the temple and its relics, that she might find her way in the domain and prove worth of a suitable posting, whether or not her older sister potentially inherits the governorship of Higo.

h3. **Akodo no Damasu Ryuji**

The eldest son of Akodo no Damasu Takanari, the Minister of War for all of Damasu lands, Ryuji came to the temple the winter before last, just after his gempukku.  It is far more common for second sons of high-ranking officials to make this kind of pilgrimage and adopt this type of training regimen, but General Takanari is a military man through and through, and understands that the first step towards being a great military leader is the cultivation of personal strength.

h3. **Akodo no Damasu Takeshi**

Taskeshi is the second son of Akodo no Damasu Aiji the Governor of Yamagata.  He is large for his age, teeming with fat and muscle, and has been studying sumo during the pilgrimage he started the year before last.

Takeshi has expressed an ease of being away from home for so long, given that he left the Chura domain and most of his friends and most of his extended family as a child.  He still refers to Shiro Chura as his home, despite that factually no longer being the case.

h3. **Akodo no Damasu Yumiko**

The eldest daughter of Akodo no Damasu Shiho, the county magistrate of Hoshizora, the county where the PCs reclaimed the stolen teaset from Village Headsman Tomonori:


The Nire lineage has only 2 county magistrates and no position on the chancellary.  The magistrate positions they hold are not hereditary to their lineage, which means that Yumiko must struggle to become worthy - so accomplished that the chancellary **must** choose her to replace her mother when the time comes, despite members of every other lineage putting forth their own candidates.  It is for this purpose that Yumiko, as the eldest child of the second-highest-ranking member of her lineage, arrived in the summer of this year, seeking the strength for the path ahead of her.

Despite being the child of a county magistrate, Yumiko wears simple pilgrim's robes, reflecting the relative poverty of her lineage and the difficult times the domain is suffering.

h3. **Asahina Kenta**

Kenta was a shrine guard in Shinden Asahina, when an Daidoji priest named Kouji entered the shrine.  Though not armed, Kouji and his companions pushed their way towards the shrine, and Kouij began making a speech about having been told in a dream by a divine figure that the time had come for the cursed sword Shitsuten (Lost Heaven) to be wielded once again.  (See the Famous swords section for an explanation of Shitsuten.)

Kenta tried to stop the priest, who had clearly fallen under the sword's influence, but he and his fellow guards were not strong enough, and Kenta almost died from being pummeled to the ground by the fists of the Daidoji.  The raid was later ruled as being legitimate by Doji Wayu, the karo to the Crane Clan magistrate for Shinden Asahina, Doji Masayo, who later appeared with the sword at the Sunset Blade Trials and killed Damasu Tsuo in her duel.

Out of the ashes of his shameful defeat, Kenta has made a warrior's pilgrimage to Toshi Ranbo, and ever since his arrival at the end of the summer of last year, Kenta has not only prayed at the Temple of Bishamon daily, but also trained unceasingly, pushing himself so that he will never again fail in his duties.

h3. **Asako Sachi**

Sachi is a renoun ichthyologist, with a specialty in tropical fish, and she has reliably received invitations to every Imperial Winter Court, where she advises courtiers from each of the 7 Great Clans, as well as the Imperial Families and minor clans.  Being from Asako lands, which was always close to Damasu lands - and now borders the Damasu directly - she has visited Toshi Ranbo many times over the years, but the year before last she bought a house in the city and has spent most of her time here, especially in the Temple District.

Steward Iori regards her with some amount of disfavor for 2 main reasons.  First, she left the city to attend Imperial Winter Court in Kyuden Shinjo the time before last, which forfeited her place in line (even as others such as Setsuko the beggar-nun - see below - were given priority).  Second, Iori considers it unseemly that she is so interested in all of the city's relics - she has spent just as much time in the Temple of Daikoku and their relics, handling the Wealth Bringer Rice Husk, the Key to Treasure Mountain, the Endless Warren, the Statue of Abundance, and others.  While many pilgrims seek the wisdom of all of the fortunes, Iori regards Sachi as a dilettante, hoping to gain wisdom and influence through proximity to the divine, rather than through discipline and study.

Admittedly, Sachi is not only interested in relics, as she spends perhaps more time with the Order of Sadahako than with all other temples combined, and they are so new that they have no significant relics to speak of.  However, she seems especially interested in those who personally knew the prophet Baiten, which Iori takes to only confirm his theory that she is seeking closeness to greatness rather than earnestly trying to put in the hard work to make herself great.

h3. **Atsumaru**

In the years before the Tsume invasion, the county magistrate of Hikobayashi was Akodo no Damasu Atsumaru.  During the 22 years that he served as county magistrate, he earned a reputation among the peasants for fairness and generosity.  He was especially adept at mediating disputes between peasants, and his subjects never hesitated to bring their conflicts to him for arbitration.

A few years before the invasion, he retired to the life of a monk in the monastery just outside the town, leaving his daughter to succeed him.  When the Tsume attacked, they quickly took control of the town and its surrounding villages, searching the monastery and seizing those within.  The samurai in town all died fighting, but the monastery was seized and secured before Atsumaru even knew what was happening.

When Atsumaru's status as a former Damasu bushi was discovered, the Tsume came close to having him executed or exiled, but the Order of Bishamon intervened on his behalf.  Not wanting to offend mighty Bishamon, the Tsume allowed Atsumaru to stay, after extracting his word that he would remain a peaceful and obedient subject of the new government.  Atsumaru explained that he wished to spend the remainder of his old age seeking spiritual enlightenment, though he said he would reluctantly pick up his daisho again and duel any Tsume bushi who took it upon himself to issue a challenge.

Atsumaru remained a thorn in the side of the Tsume, not in violation of his commitment, but because the peasants continued bringing him their disputes rather than the Tsume magistrate, Doji no Tsume Horobinu.  The Imperial Board of Justice eventually had Horobinu removed, due to recognition of Atsumaru's righteousness.

Towards the end of the war, Atsumaru went to Otosan Uchi to lobby the Imperial Ministry of Rights on behalf of the Damasu, as one with credibility to speak on behalf of the peasantry whose welfare concerned the Ministry.

He returned early last year, after the peace treaty was negotiated in Imperial Winter Court, and began praying before temple relics to further strengthen himself.  Due to his standing within the Damasu he would have held every relic by now, but he has waited for a season's worth of wisdom from the Helm of Discerning Valor, the only relic he has yet to have been granted a private session with.

h3. **Bayushi no Akiko Maiko**

Wielder of the feared sword Tamashikari (Soul Anchor) - see the Famous swords section for details.

Maiko arrived the week before Setsuban last year on a warrior's pilgrimage.  She has stayed in the city testing herself in local dojos and working her way through the Order of Bishamon’s Temple relics to pray and further strengthen herself for whatever future trials lie ahead of her now that her work hunting moon cultists in Scorpion lands has been declared to be complete.

Of course, with the Scorpion clan, it's impossible to tell whether anything that has been declared to be true is actually truthful, and Maiko's past experience as a moon cultist hunter has made some in the temple nervous.  However, she has never had any affiliation with the Crystal Champion, as her past duties purely involved seeking vengeance towards those who betrayed the Scorpion clan specifically - though it would be in line with Scorpion clan spycraft to hold such a title in secret.

However, Maiko has displayed no interest whatsoever in moon cultists, and has never even brought up the temple's past struggles with the moon cult, even as she has spent considerable time praying and meditating in the temple, and seeking the instruction of its monks.  She has expressed a particular interest in the temple's relics as a way to empower herself and strengthen her bond with the sword Tamashikari, that she may better defeat enemies of the Scorpion clan, whether executing traitors or simply winning duels against those who oppose her clan's interests.

h3. **Daidoji Yoshiyasu**

Yoshiyasu is from the Aki lineage of the ruling Daidoji House, a provincial lineage which has administered the province of Akishi since Daidoji Aki personally swore fealty to Lord Daidoji.  Akishi is a border province directly next to the Yasuki domain, and fierce Aki warriors constantly patrol the border, dealing with raids and other problems which stem from the cunning and greedy Yasuki.

As a Battalion Commander during the war, Yoshiyasu drew on both manpower and funds from his lineage.  This left them suffering from a shortage of bushi as they lost so many men during the fighting on the southern front of the war, as well as deeply in debt as they had to borrow money to cover war costs, as the proud Aki lineage contributed far more to the war effort than nearly any other lineage from the Daidoji House, despite their small size.

After the war ended, as part of the plan to repay Aki lineage debts, Yoshiyasu sold away his commission as a Battalion Commander in the southern armies of the Crane, exchanging the prestige of his position for much-needed funds to help his struggling lineage.  He came to Toshi Ranbo last winter to seek Bishamon's wisdom about how to help guide his lineage after he retires (though he has not yet retired despite being eligible to do so as a man over 40 years old).  He has donated relatively little to the temple while seeking access to temple relics, supposedly owing to the poor finances of his lineage.  Steward Iori is notoriously more concerned about the holiness of a pilgrim than the size of their purse, but still considered this somewhat of an insult, and as a result it will be a long time before Yoshiyasu is able to gain access to all of the temple relics that he seeks.

h3. **Hida Kinori**

The county magistrate of Choshizuka, a county from the Kai province of the ruling Hida domain, Kinori's county lies between the the 3rd Imperial Legion and the 1st Crab legion.  Kinori was personally present for the events leading up to the Black Scrolls being recharged, and had many encounters with the heroes whose mission recharged them, and this has driven her to seek out her own strength and religious understanding.

Kinori opposed the creation of a shrine to Osano-Wo, the Lord of Storms, and father to Hida Kaimetsu-Uo (who left the Crab to found the Mantis clan), on the Kaiu wall at the edge of her county.  When she was overruled, and the shrine later struck by lightning - an unambiguous sign of the Fortune's approval - she was humbled.  When the Black Scrolls were later recharged, and it became clear that challenging times would be ahead, Kinori set out on her pilgrimage to Toshi Ranbo.

Here she seeks not only Bishamon's strength but also his wisdom, for knowing when and how to support or oppose an action, whether religious or political or military, is the essence of wise strength.

h3. **Hida no Noriko Takeo**

Takeo was recently promoted last year to Company Captain in the Crab Legions, and is on the fast-track towards becoming a Battalion Commander.  (And who knows, perhaps one day a Legion General.)  Takeo will soon be leading a company which guards one of the wielders of one of the Black Scrolls, though the specifics are yet to be decided.

Indeed, the Black Scrolls have not yet been deployed in a significant way to push into the Deep Shadowlands, and there will be some time before that occurs.  Thus, Takeo made a warrior's pilgrimage to Toshi Ranbo last winter to pray and prepare himself for the difficult times ahead, spending considerable time in the temple, praying before its many relics.

Takeo wears the clothes he wore when he defeated an Oni no Taki-Bi (a fire oni), in the battle which gained him his promotion.  The clothes are not tainted, as Fire Oni do not taint objects which they burn, though some have looked askance at wearing such clothing into the Temple of Bishamon.  Such things are evidently accepted custom in Crab lands, and Takeo was surprised to learn that anyone would think it inappropriate, and he has declined to wear more suitable pilgrim's clothes even after it has been gently suggested to him that he might change his attire.

h3. **Ikoma Haruto**

Haruto is the eldest son of Ikoma Yuan, the Deputy Minister of War for the entire Ikoma Family.  Yuan was born into the Ryusei domain of the Mirumoto Family of the Dragon Clan, but he was exiled as the result of an internal political dispute within his own Isa lineage, after his blood feud with the wicked Shinjo no Natsune Jo escalated into a full-blown war.

Yuan is himself a courtier, and was the Minister of Revenue for the Yokohama province in the Ryusei domain, before honor demanded that he call out Jo, the wicked Provincial Minister of Justice from the neighboring Unicorn Clan domain, who had been sheltering bandits and other criminals.  With his blood feud he was able to take the life of the Chancellor of the Atsue lineage, Jo's cousin, in a plot which embroiled the Lion clan into his efforts and forged an alliance which ultimately led to the Lion / Unicorn war.

After his exile from his home domain, he swore fealty to Ikoma Tsanuri, and was appointed Deputy Minister of War after the Battle of Dark Edge Village claimed the lives of the previous Deputy Minister, Minster, and many others who were born into the noble lineages of the Ikoma who might have replaced them.  Yuan is sensitive to the Lion's value of martial prowess, and as a courtier he has ensured that his eldest son Haruto has not only trained as a bushi, but has been sent on a warrior's pilgrimage to train in Toshi Ranbo, and seek Bishamon's wisdom and strength in the Temple and through its many relics.

Haruto arrived in the spring of this year, but unfortunately it turns out he would have recieved far more martial training had he stayed with his father, who recently led an Ikoma expedition to join with Moto Gaheris to conquor the gaijin on the other side of the Twilight Mountains.  If only Haruto had not been away, he could have fought alongside his father at the Battle of Heaven's Punishment and the Battle of Kusatte Iru, a fact that has left him chagrined and disappointed with his pilgrimage, even as he refuses to give up and abandon the commitments he has made here.

h3. **Ikoma no Wakashi Sasha**

Sasha is the now-retired chancellor of the Reiko lineage of the Wakashi House, the domain which borders the Natsune domain (across the Drowned Merchant River) of the Shinjo domain of the Unicorn clan.  Sasha declares himself to be "the man who started the Lion / Unicorn war", and this is no mere brag - he led the envoy in which Ikoma Yuan (see Ikoma Haruto above) slew the Atsue chancellor as part of his blood feud, an action which heightened tensions between the Lion and Unicorn clans, which ultimately culminated in war. 

The war went well at the beginning, with the Lion winning several early victories and laying siege to Kyuden Shinjo.  It was only when the Moto appeared, with greater strength than anyone imagined they possessed, that their victory turned to ashes, and they lost over 8 thousand bushi in a single day.

As "the man who started the war", Sasha feels conflicted about his actions - while there was nothing but honor shown at the Battle of Dark Edge Village, and every Lion bushi, living and dead, has been glorified through their struggle and sacrifice, Sasha never expected his clan to be materially worse off for his actions.  Of course, he is not blamed for any of this, and the Lion continue to speak of the war as a great opportunity to refresh and renew the courage of their clan through blood and death, as bushi of each new generation must often do.

Still, Sasha remains uncertain, as the weight of responsibility lies heavy on his shoulders, and he has stated that just because he bears no shame, that does not mean he acted with wisdom.  Now that his daughter has inherited his role on the Wakashi chancellary, Sasha came to Toshi Ranbo three autumns ago, seeking Bishamon's wisdom.  He would have been done by now, except that he is waiting to don the Helm of Discerning Valor until he can receive a full season of Bishamon's wisdom, which might mean that he will be waiting for a considerable time.

h3.  **Isawa Kazuki**

Kazuki is the chancellor of the the Isawa lineage, something which would make him one of the most powerful men in any other clan, but the Isawa - and indeed the Phoenix clan itself - is truly ruled by the Council of Elemental Masters rather than by a daimyo, and despite being technically a vassal family of the Phoenix, the Isawa pay no taxes to the Shiba, for the Great Ancestor Shiba himself bent the knee to Isawa, the greatest man of his generation.

Still, being chancellor of the ruling lineage remains a position of great power and influence, and Kazuki spent the entire Lion / Crane war urging other members of his clan to engage more actively.  The Phoenix, after all, had declared war on the Lion, and Kazuki believed his Clan to be losing face and looking weak for declaring a war that they refused to fight.  Kazuki spent years growing angrier and more frustrated with his own Clan, convincing some but refusing to sway anyone who held the power to do anything, and he was far too loyal a servant to his Clan daimyo and the Elemental Masters to ever act without permission.

When the war ended, Kazuki was forced to admit that he had been wrong, his Clan had prospered during the war, the Lion and Crane alike came through with nothing but increased respect for the power and wisdom of the Phoenix.  Even their former enemies in the Lion now speak of the wise power the Phoenix wielded, supporting their Crane allies while keeping their true strength in reserve.  Kazuki has now come to question what subtle flaws within himself led him to court disaster by urging his superiors to unnecessarily reckless action.  He arrived in Toshi Ranbo in the spring of this year, and has prayed at the Temple of Bishamon daily, seeking Bishamon's wisdom, and praying for the strength **not** to fight, that this be granted to him and that he learn how to impart this lesson to his own children and grandchildren after so many years teaching them wrongly.

h3. **Kakita Kenji**

Kenji arrived a few months ago, just before the Harvest Moon of the Autumnal Equinox.  He is one of the few Crane pilgrims to have made such a pilgrimage, given the current hostility to the Crane.  In particular, Kenji waited 3 seasons after winning his duel in the Sunset Blade Trials.

Kenji has more recently returned after being sent by the PCs to find Doji Masatoshi, the man who stole the Orb of Hallowed Visions:

h3.  **Kuni Isamu**

Kuni Isamu is one of only ~200 Witch Hunters in the Empire, and is specifically thew Witch Hunter to order the death of Kuni Yori, the previous Jade Champion, on behalf of his Office, during his mission to recharge the Black Scrolls two summers ago.

The new Jade Champion is Kuni Utagu, who was previously the chief Witch Hunter for Mantis lands, and Isamu has taken on that role.  Isamu has taken some time away, as there are other Witch Hunters assigned to the Islands of Spice and Silk, to make a pilgrimage to Toshi Ranbo.  While in the Forgotten Tomb, Isamu visited a Temple to Bishamon there, and increased his mastery of archery, something he has always had a talent for.

Isamu plans to eventually compete in the Bowman's Wager, a yearly competition which takes place in Imperial Winter Court, but first must fulfill his Vow of Pilgrimage, visiting many temples of Bishamon throughout the Empire.  Although he plans to touch as many temple relics as possible while he's here, it is certain that he will not be here long enough to complete this task, as even for a man of his stature, he would have to remain here for at least a year, and he will certainly be unable to stay that long.

Isamu arrived this past autumn with his friend and fellow Hero of the Black Scrolls, Shiba Asayo (see below), though it seems likely that Asayo may stay for longer than Isamu is able, as Isamu will eventually need to return to Mantis lands.

h3. **Matsu Chokoku**

In addition to being a hero of the Lion clan, Chokoku is a local hero to the Damasu in particular, for it was he who defeated Tsume Koreshiba in the Sunset Blade Trials - without him, the province of Suruga would have been been required to have been sold to the Crane clan, as per the terms of the peace treaty.

Chokoku is also a hero of the southern front of the war, and helped Matsu Agetoki wage a nearly successful siege of Kyuden Kakita.  Agetoki was forced to pull his forces back as part of a contest in Imperial Winter Court - after the final contestants of the Bowman's Wager were narrowed down to himself and Doji Kuwanen, they made a significant wager regarding the permanent surrender of a province currently held by the Crane against Agetoki ordering an immediate withdrawal before the springtime if peace were not declared.  Agetoki's loss strengthened the Crane negotiating position in the peace summit, though Chokoku has remained staunchly in favor of his friend, who did as any warrior should, taking risks and pitting his skill against that if his enemy.

Chokoku arrived in Toshi Ranbo mid-spring, looking to further test and strengthen himself with both training and pilgrimage, and has declared his intent to stay until he has handled every temple relic.

h3. **Matsu no Hiroshi Emiko**

Emiko is in the position that Doji no Tsume Moe expects to be in a few years.  She has married, had children, and having discharged her filial responsibility to provide heirs, is now taking some time away to strengthen herself.  She stopped in Toshi Ranbo in what was supposed to be the middle of a long warrior's pilgrimage, visiting many temples to Bishamon, first in Lion lands and then later in Crab lands, but she was so overcome by the presence of mighty Bishamon here in his Temple in Toshi Ranbo that rather than leaving in Autumn of last year as planned, she has stayed on to pray before each temple relic, as she trains and tests herself in the city's many dojos.

Emiko fought on the southern front of the war, under in the infantry forces of General Matsu Agetoki, and personally participated in the failed siege of Kyuden Kakita.  Now that the war is over, she has been struck by the difference between training to fight in a military unit and training to fight as an individual.  She realizes that although various sensei did emphasize the differences, it was not until she found herself in battle that she truly understood the distinction, and she wonders whether it would be possible to transmit the wisdom she has gained now that she has experienced both.

There are certainly things that no sensei can teach, for they may only be experienced, and Emiko acknowledges that this may one such lesson.  However, if there is wisdom to be found, then it would be here, where Bishamon's guidance is felt more directly than perhaps anywhere else in the Empire.  In addition to her time spent in the temple of Bishamon, Emiko has spent considerable time and made disproportionate donations to the shrine to Wu, the minor Fortune of Sensei, hoping that she will become worthy of better guiding the next generation.

Emiko has two scars on her face she recieved during the war, and she uses makeup to make them always appear fresh and red.  Along with her dyed hair, this exhibits the style of the southern Matsu.

h3. **Matsu Yokijiro**

The wielder of the great sword Akuzuki (Wicked Moon)  - for more information on this sword, see the Famous swords section.

For information on Yokijiro himself, see the biography on his character page at Matsu Yokijiro.

Last year, Yokijiro fought and won his duel in the Sunset Blade Trials against the acclaimed duelist Doji Reju, a man who has always won every duel against any lesser or equal opponent, proving that Yokijiro's skill and sword are so far beyond the great duelist Reju than even Reju was forced to concede the superiority of his opponent.

Following the duel, Yokijiro made a pilgrimage to the Sacred Pool of Kaimetsu-Uo deep in the Isawa Woodlands, a place of healing, especially for those recovering from injuries sustained during a difficult duel. Yokijiro returned to Toshi Ranbo for the first time in many years after leaving the Isawa Woodlands, arriving the week before Setsuban.  He is seeking out the temple's relics and partnering with the Order of Bishamon to continue his work instructing those worthy students who seek his martial training.  He is especially interested in seeking Bishamon's wisdom on the question of whether he should pass the sword Akuzuki down to his eldest grandson, knowing that it may doom him to die in a duel if he does so.

h3. **Mirumoto Daini**

The younger son of the daimyo of the Mirumoto Family, Daini was the presumptive next daimyo after his older sister Hitomi went on her own warrior's pilgrimage, seeking revenge for the death of her older brother at the hands of Hida Yakamo.

Hitomi was ultimately successful - 2 summers ago she took Yakamo by surprise during the Hollyhock Festival, cutting off his right hand.  This has caused the daimyoship to pass to Kisada's now-acknowledged daughter, Hida Kohane, with his older daughter O-Ushi having died on the Day of Thunder, and Yakamo no longer being considered fit to rule.

With Hitomi returned home and Daini having relinquished his stewardship of the Mirumoto Family, Daini himself has now gone on his own warrior's pilgrimage, arriving in Toshi Ranbo a few weeks after last year's Setsuban Festival.

h3.  **Moto Chenghiz**

This man's gaijin name reveals the gaijin nature of the Moto family, who are clearly not from Rokugan originally, and who have managed, though Crane trickery, to have convinced the Imperial Ministry of Retainers that their ancestors hail from just past the Twilight Mountains, when in fact their true homeland is clearly Medin al Salaat.

Chenghiz is the eldest son of Moto Jochi, the Moto Minister of Revenue, and Chenghiz is an expert on "Moto law", as evidently the Moto are so barbarous as to not simply employ "Saibankan's Net", the system of magistrates handed down for centuries through the Imperial Ministry of Justice.

After the Moto defeated an Oni Lord at the Battle of Kussate Iru, and Moto Gaheris declared himself "Conqueror of the Northern Tribes", Chenghiz set out on his own warrior's pilgrimage, dissatisfied with his own poor showing facing down the army of lesser oni who served the oni lord Otakemaru.  He arrived at the beginning of winter, at the beginning of last month.

h3. **Setsuko the beggar nun**

Setsuko has been coming to the city off and on for decades seeking Bishamon's blessings.  Every year she must return to Otosan Uchi during the week of the Bon Festival, to hunt the rogue Shinigami which killed her family.  This means that she has never stayed in Toshi Ranbo for long enough to gain access to all of the temple's relics, though last spring Steward Iori, for the first time, allowed her to don the Helm of Discerning Valor before she left the city to return to Otosan Uchi, allowing her to jump ahead of numerous others who had been waiting far longer, and granting her months worth of the helm's wisdom.

Although it's unusual for Iori to make an exception for someone who spends so little time in the Temple of Bishamon, he asserted that the holiness of her mission was important enough to warrant the irregularity.  This caused significant upset among other relic-seekers, all of whom were more wealthy and powerful than Setsuko the beggar-nun, but Iori asserted that such things are of no consequence to mighty Bishamon, and the only question he should consider is what higher purpose Bishamon wishes him to support. 

It is unclear whether Setsuko is currently in the city, though she did return after an unfruitful week in Otosan Uchi during the Bon Festival, when she once again failed to spot the Shinigami, thus once again delaying their fourth and final confrontation.

h3. **Shiba Asayo**

Asayo is a courtier who was assigned to the 3rd Imperial Legion who met the customary skepticism that most bushi feel for any courtier assigned to the Wall.  Many feel nervous about going into battle alongside a man who isn’t a warrior, far preferring bushi comrades who are maximally trained in combat.  They were further suspicious of his seemingly foppish nature, as his main interests are playwriting and painting.  However, he proved himself in battle and in the dojo enough times that no one who has fought against or alongside him has any concern about his worthiness.

Before each mission or undertaking of any sort - such as going into the Shadowlands when he was assigned there - Asayo paints one half of a painting, then  finishes it after his return.  The first half is itself a complete (if spare) work, and the second half fills in details which often change the overall meaning of the piece.  As he progresses in mastery of his art, Asayo increasingly finds himself in a sublime and almost trancelike state as he paints, as the process of the great masters has been described.  Just as a swordsman is told to strike with no thought, so too has Asayo begun to create with a clear mind and let the brush move of its own accord.  Eventually he began noticing details in his half-finished works that he does not remember adding, which he recognizes as a sign that he is on the path to becoming one of the transcendent masters.

Asayo has received the Order of the Precious Crown, the highest honor that anyone below the rank of daimyo can receive, for being one of the Heroes of the Black Scrolls, having successfully fulfilled the mission to recharge them.  He came to Toshi Ranbo at the beginning of this past autumn, lured by the city's plentiful actors and relatively new Temple to Sadahako, the Fortune of Artists and Entertainers.  He splits his time evenly between the Order of Bishamon and the Order of Sadahako, though being already rich and married, he has made only perfunctory visits and meager donations to the temples of Daikoku and Benten.

Asayo is traveling with his friend and fellow Hero of the Black Scrolls, Kuni Isamu (see above).

h3. **Shiba Tsukune**

One of the best duelists in all of Phoenix lands, it was Tsukune who defeated Matsu Gohei in the Sunset Blade Trials last year.  She has since come to the Temple of Bishamon to further train in the city's dojos and test herself physically and spiritually.  Tsukune is still young enough that she could become Emerald Champion if Bayushi Karasu were to die or retire, assuming she is able to reach the peak of mastery of her art.

More recently there has been speculation about what might happen when Gohei arrives in the city, alongside Hantei Daigotsu and Akodo Godaigo and Kitsu Okura.  The Phoenix and the Lion clans are now at peace, but there is less danger of provoking a war or other escalations if a conflict occurs between them.  On the other hand, Akodo Toturi's new wife is Isawa Kaede, so it may be the case that as a relatively pacifistic Phoenix, Tsukune does not wish to start an altercation, and as a relatively loyal Lion, Gohei would be afraid to start one.

h3. **Shinjo no Dorai Yuriko**

The Dorai domain of the Shinjo house controls the most fertile wheat fields in the Firefly River Valley, making them the owners of the breadbasket of northwestern Rokugan.  Toshi Ranbo imports considerable wheat flour from the Dorai, and for decades Yuriko's father Rakuo has negotiated these imports on behalf of his daimyo and other wheat-sellers.  This year the Dorai have shifted to importing unmilled wheat directly and letting local laborers mill it into flour, and so as Rakuo's eldest child, Yuriko has gotten a front row seat to the business negotiations which are involved in such matters.

Rakuo has spent decades in and out of Toshi Ranbo, and has expressed considerable interest in audiences with temple relics, but due to his lack of availability, he has usually lost his place in line, and Steward Iori appears to have a relatively low opinion of him.  However, Rakuo has had his daughter stay in Toshi Ranbo for as long as it takes, so she has not left the city for a year, ever since she arrived here late in the year following her gempukku in the spring.  Iori has shown much more favor towards her than her father, and Yuriko will likely have been granted personal time with every temple relic by next summer.

Her father came with her when she arrived in the city last year, so his name will turn up on any lists of pilgrims interested in relics, though he otherwise does not fit the pattern that the PCs are looking for:

h3. **Shione Haru**

By now the PCs are already quite familiar with Shione Haru, whose name is pronounced in the Mantis fashion, more like the baying of a hound, or a sneeze: ha-ROO!

As he has explained, Haru came to the city last winter with his brother-in-law Putera (poo-TER-ah!) to seek Bishamon's wisdom as to how they should steer their clan's future.  Putera ultimately decided that he had gotten all the relic access he needed, but Haru (ha-ROO!) has stayed for over a year, spending the time setting up business deals with his sugarcane empire as the primary owner of the Silken Syrum Consortium, which provides literally all of the sugarcane products to the northern empire.

Haru (ha-ROO!) evidently made a poor impression when, in the Yasuki style, he tried to bribe his way into getting quicker relic access.  When told that extra donations were only good up to a point, and time and preparation was required, especially for accessing certain relics, Haru (ha-ROO!) immediately asked just how much of a donation would be sufficient to bypass this.  It was almost as if it was inconceivable to him that there could be some requirement that more money could not bypass, which did not kindly dispose Steward Iori towards him.

Over the past year, Haru (ha-ROO!) has made frequently trips to the Temple of Bushamon, but has rarely stayed overnight, and not for any significantly length of time, not even during holy weeks of prayer and fasting.

h3. **Shosuro no Michio Katsuro**

The Michio house is in many ways the Scorpion equivalent to the Damasu.  Their capital is Ryoko Owari, the second largest city in the Empire, a larger city than either their Family capital (Kyuden Shosuro) or their Clan capital (Kyuden Bayushi).  Thus, just as the Damasu are far wealthier, more powerful, and more influential than most vassal houses, so too are the Michio the second most powerful domain in Scorpion lands - second only to the ruling Bayushi house.

Indeed, the Michio were one of the five families of the Gozoku, along with the Bayushi, the Isawa, the Doji, and the Tsume.  Katsuro therefore has a close connection with the most hated enemy of the Damasu - the Tsume - though he himself speaks of such matters as "ancient history", as the Gozoku alliance ended nearly 6 centuries ago.  In fact Katsuro has declared his disappointment that with so many Tsume duelists dead from the war, he will not have a chance to test himself in exhibition matches against their greatest warriors of this generation.

Katsuro has arranged sparring matches against many local duelists, including some other relic seekers.  He won his match against Shiba Tsukune, lost his match to Matsu Yokijiro, won against Matsu Chokoku, lost to Mirumoto Kiyoshi, and strangely has yet to challenge his fellow Scorpion Bayushi no Akiko Maiko.

Katsuro is the captain of the Lightning Squad, an elite team of first responders who swiftly deploy to any incident in Ryoko Owari.  The city guard of Ryoko Owari are known as the Thunder Guard, and just as thunder follows lightning, the entire city's forces will be close behind Katsuro when needed to put down any unrest.  He strives to always be worthy of such responsibilities, and managed to on several occasions strike at moon cult hideouts, whose members had fled Kyuden Bayushi and tried to hide in Ryoko Owari.  Now that it has been over a year since any such traitors to the Scorpion clan have been found, Katsuro has journeyed to Toshi Ranbo on a warrior's pilgrimage, arriving this summer to pray and train.

Togashi Ichiharu, Mirumoto Kiyoshi, and Kitsuki Hina:

This trio of traveling adventurers have been to the city many times before, but returned for the first time in nearly a decade late last year, arriving just before the Harvest Moon of the Fall Equinox.  This is not the first time that Kiyoshi or Hina have expressed an interest in temple relics, but in the past Togashi Ichiharu always eschewed such things, as part of his vows as an ascetic Ize Zumi monk.

It's unclear what changed last year to cause him to seek out the encounters with temple relics, but he has remained in the city for most of the intervening time.  Steward Iori is somewhat suspicious of him, though not in the sense of believing his motives to be impure, for the piousness of the Togashi is known throughout the Empire.  However, Iori has expressed that Ichiharu is likely the victim of false doctrines, as he asserts that "the mad monks of Tohashi mountain" are as likely to confuse people away from enlightenment as they are to help people achieve it.

Iori also believes that Ichiharu may be frequently leaving the city or even the domain, despite being told to remain in the city to be on hand if the opportunity arises to be granted a private audience with a relic.  Every time Ichiharu has been summoned he has responded, but at other times the enigmatic monk is frequently nowhere to be found, not even when Kiyoshi and Hina's whereabouts are accounted for.

Kiyoshi and Hina have continued to donate to the Temple of Bishamon, and pray there, and express interest in audiences with the temple's relics.  Kiyoshi herself is an accomplished duelist, and wields of the famous sword Seiginryu (Justice of the Silver Dragon) - see the Famous swords section below for details.

h3. **Initial Findings**

The PCs' staff was initially unable to locate 8 people on that list.  Relic seekers are instructed not to leave the city without informing the temple, and this will be a ding on their records and affect their places in line as relic seekers, lengthening the amount of time it will take them to gain access to all of the temple relics.  

Here's the list, in alphabetical order:
* **Akodo no Damasu Jinsei** was staying with cousins from the Chura lineage, but left the city recently, and his aunts claim to not know where he has gone.
* **Akodo no Damasu Maya** has supposedly taken a quick trip back to the provincial city of Higo to spend time with her father, who is the governor there.
* **Akodo no Damasu Ryuji** was not at home any of the time that your staff visited his father's city estate, and no member of your staff was present the time that he presented himself at the temple as a follow-up.
* **Isawa Kazuki** seems to have left the city without informing the temple, and the single household servant maintaining his rented household in his absence claims to have no knowledge of when he will return.  He took the rest of his servants with him on his trip.
* **Kitsuki Hina** and **Mirumoto Daini** have left the city to visit Shiro Sakura in the north.  Mirumoto Kiyoshi has declined to explain the purpose of this trip, cryptically refusing to say more than that it is part of "an investigation".
* **Setsuko the beggar nun** has no permanent address and has not been located.  It's possible that she left the city, as she is not a long-term resident here, despite spending most of the past year in the city (except for returning to Otosan Uchi for the week of the Bon Festival).
* **Togashi Ichiharu** has never been present any of the times that your staff visited the city house he resides in along with Mirumoto Kiyoshi and Kitsuki Hina.  He presented himself at the temple the very next day after each visit, causing your staff to wonder if he really lives there.  When asked where he is, Kiyoshi has simply said "walking", and when asked where he walked, she would only enigmatically reply, "the way".

There weren't any shocking living situations, though there were a few minor surprises.  In alphabetical order:

* **Asako Sachi** has a small city home which she evidently has barely used since buying it.  She has been so popular with the city's courtiers, and with the daimyo Damasu Chiho in particular, that she has been granted semi-permanent quarters in the castle keep.  Strangely, she seemed to have some other third residence, since she spends at least a few days each week elsewhere in the city, and not at her rented home.  Your staff initially assumed she was pursuing romantic entanglements, but it turned out to be the opposite - she frequently spends the night praying at the Temple of Sadahako, alternating between the smaller one in the Temple District, and the larger temple a mile outside the city.
* **Hida no Noriko Takeo** is renting a house in the merchant neighborhood to the northeast of Merchant's Cross Lake, specifically the one which used to be a samurai neighborhood.  When asked, his wife explained that she hadn't realized the neighborhood status had changed when she rented it.  This would be in keeping with a separate real estate blunder she also made, in which she bought several warehouses from the Akio merchant family, apparently not realizing that they were in northeast Owari too far from the city, canals, and Imperial roads to be useful.  Your staff described Takeo as smiling fondly as his wife described the home rental snafu, reporting that he seems charmed rather than annoyed by his wife's poor household management skills.  (Presumably, if this was something he valued highly enough, he would have married a Yasuki instead of a fellow Hida.)
* **Kuni Isamu** told the temple that they could find him through the local Witch Hunters (plural!  Toshi Ranbo is one of only 4 cities in the Empire to have more than 1 Witch Hunter, along with Otosan Uchi, Ryoko Owari, and the Yasuki Estates).  However, he turned out to be living with his friend and fellow recipient of the Order of the Precious Crown, Shiba Asayo.  Both of them appear to be training dogs for sport, to compete in some kind of local dogfighting circuit.  Evidently they are engaged in a project to prove that dogs initially trained for hunting and then turned into fighters will be superior to classically trained fighting dogs in certain respects, and they perform this project in their spare time on the grounds of Asayo's rented country home in Hikobayashi, just outside the city.
* **Ikoma Haruto** has a small rented home in the city, along with other visiting members of the Ikoma family.  It's surprising that he does not stay with Ikoma Aimi, the Ikoma Emmisary to the Damasu, especially since his father is the Ikoma Family Deputy Minister of War, and is from the same ruling Ikoma lineage as Aimi.  More surprising is that when your staff visited Aimi's estate, they were followed out by a Phoenix merchant named Shiba no Kenshin Basho, who inquired about their business and position.  Upon learning that the visiting monks report to the karmic inquisitors, Basho immediately made a 4 bu, 1 zenni donation (no one would ever give a gift of exactly 4 bu, due to the number's association with death), and asked to be informed when you retuned to the city, so he could speak to you about his business as a horse trader.

h3. Initial follow-up to the initial findings

Huiru can use his Goju abilities to find people whose name he knows.  As a reminder, there are several reasons why Huiru might fail to find someone:
* They could be far enough away that their recognition is not high enough for him to be able to sense them.
* He might know them by a false name.
* He might know them by the correct name, but they gave that name to a tsukai, and the name itself is too far away.
* He might know them by the correct name, but they are dead.

Here's the alphabetically sorted list of relic seekers Huiru is unable to locate:
* **Akodo no Damasu Jinsei**
* **Akodo no Damasu Maya**
* **Hida no Noriko Takeo**
* **Isawa Kazuki**
* **Kuni Isamu** (this one is expected, as no Witch Hunter ever goes by their true name, to prevent bloodspeakers from being able to curse them)
* **Setsuko the beggar nun**
* **Togashi Ichiharu**

h3. Sustained follow-up

The PCs requested their staff try to track down those who were out of the city, as well as get more information about the people in interesting circumstances within the city.  This is in progress, and so far this is what has been reported as of the 4th day of the 12th month, in alphabetical order:

* **Asako Sachi** has been confirmed to have been spending most nights in the main Temple of Sadahako outside of the city in western Owari.  Your staff visited and spent considerable time praying there, and observed her talking with Grand Abbot Naoki.  Normally a visiting samurai consulting with the Grand Abbot of the Order of Sadahako would be presumed to be seeking advice, but in this case it may have been Naoki who was consulting with Sachi, who is an Empire-renown expert ichthyologist and also extremely politically connected with the Imperial Court.  The content of their discussions is unknown, though your staff is working diligently to learn more.

* **Hida no Noriko Takeo** has evidently returned to the city.  Huiru couldn't locate him when he last tried, but your staff found him at home, and made inquiries with his neighbors about his conduct.  They had evidently expected a series of wild parties when they learned a Crab clan bushi was moving into the neighborhood, as the Crab clan generally and Hida bushi in particular are noritious drunkards, but evidently the family is on their best behavior while visiting a foreign city.  Takeo and his wife keep to themselves and display the proper reserve and decorum expected of samurai, even those  temporarily housed in a merchant neighborhood.

* **Togashi Ichiharu** has evidently been returning to the city so late at night that it's practically morning by the time he returns.  Huiru was unable to locate him when last he tried, but he is definitely spending time in the city in the home he shares with Mirumoto Kiyoshi.  Your staff spoke with the city guards who oversee the gates between the neighborhoods, and evidently Ichiharu returns every night through the northern city gate - despite the fact that the rightward gate is closer to his home.  The guards report that while this has been happening off and one for the past year, it picked up and became an almost-every-night occurrence the month before last.




FAMOUS SWORDS:

The PCs in the Karmic Inquisitors campaign asked for a list of famous swords in and around the domain, with particular attention to swords in Damasu lands or in Crane possession nearby.  They suspected that a powerful sword might be responsible for the affliction of the domain.

Here's a list of the 10 most famous swords which the PCs was able to learn about.  This involved some consultation with local samurai, who have better records about particular swords and who among the local peerage currently possesses them.

h4. **Amatsukami no Ken** (Heavenly Sovereign's Sword)

This is the ancestral sword of the Damasu, currently wielded by their daimyo, Akodo no Damasu Chiho.

This sword was not forged by human hands, and was given to Akodo Damasu during a trance he entered while praying to his ancestors.  It is adorned with symbols of the heavens - clouds and stars - etched along its blade, and regardless of whether exposed to sunlight or moonlight, its blade glints and gleams with the light of the stars.

It’s particularly noted for its role in the Battle of the Shifting Mists, the final battle in which Akodo Damasu fought, leading his men directly into the middle of the enemy forces, splitting them in two, forcing a retreat, and saving the army of Lord Akodo himself from a disastrous ambush at its flank.  Akodo Damasu died a hero shortly thereafter of wounds sustained in that battle, and the sword's glint intensified at the moment of his death, forever solidifying the connection between the first Damasu and this blade.

Akodo Damasu's wisdom is channeled through this blade, and brings clarity in leadership to all who have come after him, guiding its wielder through political turmoil and battle alike with an almost preternatural foresight.  The sword was lost when the Tsume took the city of Toshi Ranbo, and it was taken as a trophy by Tsume Yasujiro who became the governor of Toshi Ranbo under Tsume occupation.

When Kakita Kenji forced the governor to step down by winning a duel against his yojimbo Tsume Koreshiba, it was decided that the sword should stay in the city, and it was passed onto Doji Hirota, who married the new governor, Tsume Momoko.  As a result, the sword was returned to its rightful Damasu ownership when Akodo Toturi retook the city.

h4. **Ohari** (Big Needle)

This is the most famous sword possessed by the Riori lineage, and is the familial sword of the governor of Owari, who has always been a Riori ever since Akodo Riori swore fealty to Lord Akodo and was assigned as a retainer to Akodo Damasu at the dawn of the Empire.  The rhyme of the names is intentional - Ohari means "big needle" and Owari is the "end" of the domain, acting as a bulwark against foreign invaders, with the Riori lineage forever an important line of defense.

The sword gained its reputation during the Gozoku.  The Tsume house and their allies pushed south - prior to the Gozoku there were 2 Crane clan domains to the north of Imperial lands, with the rest of the Crane being to the south, and the Crane sought to conquor a strip of Lion lands to join the north and south together, along with forcing the Seppun to forfeit some of their own holdings through political machinations in the Imperial Court.

Tsume Nobura was made the daimyo of the new Nobura domain, and while acting as general of his new retainers, he tried to expand his holdings by pushing into Hiyu lands.  The Damasu contributed troops to the support of their southern neighbors, and General Fumikazu personally struck down General Nobura, piercing his armor with his family sword Ohari, which stabbed (rather than slashed) through the heavy armor like a needle passing through cloth, scattering his troops and winning the battle in that moment.

Akodo no Damasu Eisuke retold this history and proudly displayed Ohari to inspire his men at each of the 4 sieges of Owari, who were so committed to the city that they were willing to fight and die to the last rather than surrender.  After Eisuke was promoted to the position of Minister of Revenue of the Damasu, he passed the sword onto his daughter, Akodo no Damasu Gisako, who succeeded him as governor or Owari, as the sword now holds a special reputation as a defender of the city.

The family considered vowing that the sword should never leave the city, but its past successes in faraway battles led them to decide against this, for this would undersell the power of this sword.  After all, Ohari has had success in many battles, both in and out of the city of Owari, so while the family has decided that the sword should stay at the side of the Riori governor of the Owari province, it may leave when the governor leaves, and be deployed anytime the governor rides to battle.

h4. **Seishinsho** (Spirit Whisper)

This sword's origin is unknown - it was gifted to Akodo Biko, the second son of the Akodo daimyo many centuries ago, by a mysterious hermit who explained that the sword had been blessed by the Jade Dragon.  Seishinsho has a slender, elegant blade with cherry blossom motifs running along the hilt, symbolizing beauty and the transient nature of life.  Its characteristic jade insets are along the sword's guard and handle of the sword.

Akodo Biko's stories of the sword's might were proven correct when he won The Duel of Falling Leaves.  The sword "sang" as it cut through the autumn leaves which fell to the ground during the duel, and Seishinsho's connection to the spirit realm was felt by all who witnessed its killing strike.  Biko advised his descendants to attune themselves to the sword in order to make themselves capable of heeding the sword's guidance.

Seishinsho has indeed whispered guidance to those in Biko's family line, offering advice in times of moral quandary.  However, because the source of this wisdom is the Jade Dragon rather than being primarily Biko and the other ancestors who formerly possessed this sword, the advice often points in a particular direction, particularly violent opposition to all tsukai and other agents of the Shadowlands.

Wielders of Seishinsho have often been encouraged by the sword to enlist in the Imperial legions which guard the great Kaiu Wall, and the sword is sometimes gifted to family members who choose such service for themselves.  Over the centuries, this sword has slain a minor oni of each of the 4 elements: an Oni no Mizu (water oni), an Oni no Kaze (air oni), an Oni no Jizen (earth oni), and an Oni no Taki-bi (fire oni).

Akodo no Damasu Kaguya currently holds this sword, having brought it to Damasu lands when she swore fealty to her new daimyo after the war and became the Chancellor of the Damasu lineage.

h4. **Kishin no Ketsui** (Resolve of the Fierce God)

It has been claimed that Lord Akodo, towards the end of his life, expressed his only deep regret.  While the Great Ancestor stood by all of the major decisions and choices throughout his long and noble life, he regretted that for all that he had successfully taught his people how to make war, he had never found the time to teach them how to make peace.  Thus, Lord Akodo worried that he was leaving a clan not properly balanced between the inevitability of war and the necessity of peacemaking.

It is disputed whether Akodo truly said this, and some past Lion daimyo have clarified that he never put this to paper "not even in his secret writings", but other wise Lion historians such as Akodo Kage, esteemed sensei of the Lion and karo to Akodo Toturi, have declared that the truth of this observation is evident to anyone who has read Lord Akodo and comprehended him.

While the Lion have fought many wars, their most infamous conflicts have been internal, especially between the Akodo and Matsu families.  There came a time when the Matsu outgrew the Akodo, becoming the largest Great Family in all the Empire.  At this time, the discontent between the Akodo and Matsu grew, and many in the Matsu wondered whether they should continue to owe fealty and pay taxes to a smaller and perhaps weaker Family.

Akodo Fujita was the second son of the Lion daimyo, and it was he who managed to strike a balance, making peace while ensuring that the Matsu both received the respect and honor that they were due while also providing the taxes and levies which they owed.  To symbolize this act of peacemaking, Fujita commissioned this sword, which acts as a tribute to the bond between all of the families of the Lion.  Fujita himself married a Matsu woman, and unlike any member of the Akodo damyo's immediate family through the centuries until that point, joined the Matsu family rather than keeping his Akodo family name, in honor of the Matsu's family's strength and honor.

Kishin no Ketsui features a golden guard engraved with a lion's mane, depicting the courage and authority of the Lion. When one masters this sword, its blade resonates with the user's heartbeat, growing steadier and more precise as the wielder's resolve strengthens.  It is thus able to guide its owner towards ends which specifically involve Lion family unity, and as such the sword has at this point been possessed over the centuries by members of each Lion family - even the Kitsu!

Akodo no Damasu Sei carried this sword in Imperial court while the peace treaty between the Lion and Crane was being negotiated.  While Sei did not act as a primary negotiator or meet personally with the Emperor, he was heavily involved in the ancillary negotiations.  (Timetables on the delivery of gifts and other payments, the percentage of payments made in gold vs silver vs rice, etc.)  Sei brought this sword to Damasu lands after swearing fealty to Damasu Chiho after the war, and now uses the sword to strengthen the peace as Chancellor of the new Sei lineage.


h4. **Akuzuki** (Wicked Moon)

This sword is not only impressive on its own, but also has a fantastic sheath - it was the saya that caused a Tsume bushi to once comment that this sword seemed "too good for" it's current wielder, Matsu Yokijiro.  Yokijiro absolutely humiliated the hapless Tsume, who quickly realized that not only was the sword impressive, but Yokijiro would certainly kill him in a duel.

Had the cowardly Tsume actually been willing to fight Yokijiro and somehow slain him, he would have inherited Akuzuki, which must always be willed to whoever kills its wielder in a duel.  This can be difficult to avoid, since whoever holds this sword must accept any challenge to a duel to the death.  (Duels to submission do not trigger a change of ownership.)

Akuzuki has been in Yokijiro's family for 3 generations, which is only 1 fewer generation than the previous record, during which time it was in the possession of a family line of Shosuro duelists.  Yokijiro is proud of this accomplishment, and has won many duels with this sword, but he wonders whether the 4th generation is cursed - the number 4 is associated with death, so if he leaves this sword to his own grandson, this may doom his grandson to die in a duel.

Of course, this is not necessarily a bad thing, and although Yokijiro has sought the counsel of members of the Order of Bishamon about this, his current intention is indeed to pass this sword along to his grandson (who is currently only a baby) upon his retirement.  After all, even if the curse is real, his grandson may win many righteous duels along the way to his death, and to pass the sword along to someone else when he retires would be a failure to teach courage to his descendants.


h4. **Kasai Tsume** (Fire Claw)

This is the ancestral sword of the Tsume.  While every daimyo in the Empire has an ancestral sword of their house, there are around 350 domains, and not all of them have an impressive enough sword for anyone outside of their domain to have any regard for it, making most ancestral swords "locally famous" rather than actually famous.

Kasai Tsume is **actually** famous, with a well-earned reputation.  It was used by Doji Tsume to conquer the castle that eventually grew into Kyuden Tsume.  Doji Tsume later made a pilgrimage to Morning Glory Castle, where the visiting Master of Fire advised him to climb to the peak of Asako Mountain and pray for heaven's strength.

While meditating at the mountain's highest plateau, a meteor began to descend to the sky directly towards him.  His first reaction was to think that the Master of Fire had set him up, and was now using his powerful Phoenix magics to assassinate a rival daimyo.  However, before he began to descend away from the mountaintop in a panic, he stopped and chose instead to turn towards the descending fireball and draw his sword to cleave it in two.

The blade now carries with it not only the residual patterns from the scorching meteorite, but the essence of fire, and this has only further empowered the sword, especially when on the attack.  Tsume Retsu held it as he personally led the assault which conquered Toshi Ranbo in 1117, and Kasai Tsume has been used throughout the history of the violent Tsume house in many battles.

This sword is said to be at its most powerful when attacking - it has never participated in a broken siege as the attacker.  However, the times when its wielders have been defeated have invariably been when on the defense, when the sword (while great in power in all situations) is less able to bring is awesome might to bear.  During the Lion/Crane war, the Lion clan was consistently on the offense, which allowed for few circumstances in which the sword could be wielded effectively.

Kasai Tsume is currently in the posession of Doji no Tsume Takashi, the son of Tsume Retsu and current daimyo of the Tsume family.

h4. **Shitsuten** (Lost Heaven)

The final sword forged by the legendary swordsmith Daidoji Masamune, who poured all of his hatred for the Yasuki into this sword.  Many of his previous swords were forged with restrictions on their use for what they must do after being unsheathed - most of his swords must draw blood before they may be put away, and thus to even perform kata with such a sword may require that the wielder nick themselves to satisfy the sword's bloodlust.  Shitsuten carries a harsher requirement and must take a human life after being drawn before it may be resheathed.

Daidoji Masamune's early patrons were mainly Yasuki nobles, and he felt especially betrayed when the Yasuki family left the Crane clan to join the Crab, as the resulting fighting led to many of his own swords being used to spill Crane blood in battle.  Yasuki Tsanumi spent decades as the Yasuki Family daimyo pledging his undying loyalty to the Crane, but when the Imperial Ministry of Rites ruled that Yasuki rice plantations were a violation of the Celestial Order, he may as well have been a completely different person, proving that treachery lies deep in Yasuki blood.

Masamune named Shitsuten (Lost Heaven) not only in reference to the loss of divine connection between the Yasuki and Crane, but also regarding the manner in which Yasuki rice plantations threatened the very fabric of society and the benevolence of heaven towards humanity.  He gave this sword to Daidoji Susano, whose pious devotion to heavenly justice led him to continue to raid Yasuki lands even after the Crab/Crane fighting had stopped, seeking out rice plantations where the farmers suffered under the whips of Yasuki taskmasters rather than working the land as tenants as they should.  The bloodlust of Masamune's fearsome sword forced Susano to pursue those who fled on these raids until each time he could kill at least one Yasuki samurai.

Yasuki Aina was the County Magistrate of Friendly Traveler Village, a large town close to the border along Earthquake Bay (not actually a village, this settlement has retained its famous name from when it was far smaller).  Although she herself was a soybean merchant who had never even attempted to form rice plantations, she was tired of Susano's successful raids on her lands, so she set a trap for him, creating fake plantations filled with archers ready to string their hidden bows the moment a raiding party approached.  Susano took the bait, and having already drawn Shitsuten refused to flee when the trap was sprung, shot down in an ill-advised cavalry charge.  Susano's men took his body and fled, leaving Shitsuten behind, as none of them dared to touch the cursed sword.

Yasuki Aini retrieved the sword herself and displayed it proudly as a trophy in her manor in Friendly Traveler Village.  However, the sword's hatred proved disastrous for her, and her soybean business was ruined by Yasuki gangsters from Peddler's Row, who smashed her casks of soy sauce and soybean oil, sank her transport boats in Earthquake Bay, and burned the farmhouses of the soybean farmers who worked in her fields.  Aini refused to back down from whatever dispute she had gotten herself into, possibly defying the feared Lords of the Coin under the influence of the cursed sword she foolishly displayed in her home, and she was eventually killed in a street attack in her own town.

Aina's daughter donated the sword to Shinden Asahina, which promised to keep the sword safe in a shrine.  For 7 centuries, Asahina storytellers would train and practice their craft by telling the sword stories of those who had set aside their anger and hatred, seeking the Shinsei rather than vengeance.  However, the sword was taken from its shrine in Shinden Asahina by a Daidoji priest who claimed to have been told to do so by a powerful mysterious god in a dream.  Doji Masayo had been appointed the Crane Clan Magistrate for Shinden Asahina after the Lion/Crane war, and she ruled that this was not a theft and should be allowed, and then suspiciously the sword was given to her, and she appeared wielding it at the Sunset Blade Trials last winter, using it to kill Damasu Tsuo (and later Damasu Saki earlier this winter).

h4. **Seiginryu** (Justice of the Silver Dragon)

After the legendary swordsmith Hyobu went into retirement, he decided to climb Togashi Mountain from the east, along its confusing and otherworldly network of mountain paths and caves.  This is the most auspicious set of paths for those who climb the mountain seeking enlightenment, but there are many dangers, and few reach the mountaintop by those routes.  The mountain does not permit the unworthy to ascend from this direction, and thus many travelers either perish before they reach the top, or take up a new life there, living as hermits or in small communities of goatherds as they prepare themselves to continue their ascent.

Hyobu was one such man, who spent years climbing the mountain from the east, sometimes spending months on his journeys, sometimes giving up and returning to the base of the mountain for supplies or respite.  Eventually he befriended a Silver Dragon which he met on his final climb, which gifted him a large scale after he managed to solve its 7 holy riddles over the course of 7 days and nights.

Hyobu never made it to Kyuden Togashi - instead he descended a final time, coming out to retirement and using the Silver Dragon's scale to form an alloy of silver and steel, which he used to forge a final set of 7 swords, the greatest of all of his works.  Each sword was associated with a different riddle asked by the Silver Dragon, whose answers each corresponded to the 7 tenants of bushido.

Seiginryu (Silver Dragon's Justice) is the sword associated with the Virtue of Justice, and it is often wielded by Kitsuki Magistrates and duelists of the Dragon Clan who work to bring criminals to justice.  When wielded against the unrighteous, the light which catches the sword forms a glint which appears as a blinding flash to a wicked opponent.  Past duelists have sometimes won duels against superior opponents who were blinded by the sword's reflected light as the sword was drawn in an iaijutsu strike.

Mirumoto Kiyoshi currently wields this sword, and she has spent the past decade in and out of Damasu lands.  Though she is a Dragon Clan magistrate and has never joined the Imperial Ministry of Justice as an Imperial Magistrate, she carries Imperial travel papers and has many letters of introduction by impressive Imperial magistrates whom she has helped.  Her daring technique has often been to set traps for bandits and river pirates, whose overconfidence in confronting a small group of herself and her companions (Kitsuki Hina and Togashi Ichiharu) with far superior numbers leaves them exposed when they fail to kill or capture Kiyoshi and her friends.  This has earned Kiyoshi the nickname The Silver Streak of Justice, a reference to the sword Seginryu as well as Kiyoshi's own innate quickness with the blade.

h4. **Tamashikari** (Soul Anchor)

This is the 5th most famous sword in the Scorpion Clan.  The Ancestral Swords of the Bayushi Family, Shosuro Family, and Michio House are all more famous, as is Bayushi Tangen's **Kurainigo** (the Dark Sword of Bitter Lies), but aside from these there are no other Scorpion sword swords which anyone could seriously argue are more famous than Tamashikari.

The Scorpion Clan consider loyalty to be the most important tenant of bushido, for as Bayushi Ujiro is recorded as having said in the famous storyteller Kakita Ryoku's novel "Winter", "without loyalty, every other virtue possessed by your retainer serves only your enemy".  Traitors, therefore, are deserving of the highest punishment, and Soshi shugenja have created a holy and terrible place known as Traitor's Grove, where traitors to the Scorpion Clan are executed.  The executed traitor's soul is bound to a tree, and so long as that tree lives, their soul is denied access to the cycle of death and rebirth.

While being a tree is not inherently bad, and the souls of trees may exist contentedly for many centuries, a human intellect bound to a tree will be inevitably driven to madness.  It is said that for every year spent as a tree, it will take an entire future lifetime to recover from the depths of madness to which the souls in Traitor's Grove are driven.  The Masters of Purity of that dark garden know how to keep trees alive for hundreds of years, ensuring that even after its victims re-enter the cycle of death and rebirth it will take hundreds of generations to regain a semblance of their sanity.

Bayushi Aramoro was the brother of Bayushi Shoju, the daimyo of the Scorpion Clan, when the treasonous moon cult tried to overthrow him.  Although the moon cult was defeated, it did kill his children, and Bayushi Shoju died soon after, from wounds suffered at the hands of a poisoned blade.  Aramoro became the new daimyo and married Shoju's widow, Bayushi Kachiko (known as the Mistress of Lies).

There were many trees planted in Traitor's Grove in the years following the destruction of the moon cult, as those who offered knowing assistance in any way to the coup were found and executed there.  Bayushi no Akiko Otera was a county magistrate from the neighboring Akiko House of the Bayushi family, and he was instrumental in uncovering the moon cult before the coup could strike.  He and his karo Bayushi no Akiko Maiko were promoted and serve as agents of Bayushi Aramoro, now performing duties which Aramoro previously performed for his brother Shoju.

Tamashikari (Soul Anchor) was the sword previously wielded by Aramoro, but now that he is daimyo he has given it to Bayushi Maiko, who unlike Otera is an accomplished duelist, and therefore a better candidate to wield the sword.  Although there are a few more famous swords in Scorpion lands, including **Itsuwari**, their Ancestral Sword now wielded by Aramoro, there is no sword more feared than Tamashikari, which anchors itself to the souls of those it kills, ensuring that those souls may be later bound to trees in Traitor's Grove at a later time.

Those pursued by one who wields Tamashikari have been known to take their own lives rather than risk being killed by this sword, and those challenged to duels under accusation of treachery against either the Scorpion clan or the Empire have sometimes committed seppuku rather than fight in such a duel.  Bayushi Maiko has seemingly completed the years of work required to root out supporters of the moon cult, during which time she used Tamashikari to kill many traitors, in duels and in surprise raids.

With this work complete, Maiko came to Toshi Ranbo last winter on a warrior's pilgrimage, and has stayed in the city testing herself in local dojos and working her way through the Order of Bishamon's Temple relics to pray and further strengthen herself for whatever future trials lie ahead of her.





THE FIRST TOSHI RANBO CAMPAIGN:

The "Karmic Inquisitors" campaign is actually the second time that I've set a campaign in the Damasu domain.  An earlier campaign was set in Toshi Ranbo, and here was my campaign overview at that time:

For a thousand years the the city of Toshi Ranbo was the capital of the Damasu, one of the largest houses of the Akodo family.  Three years ago the domain was conquered by the Tsume, one of the largest houses of the Doji family.  Due to a severe flooding after a torrential rainstorm, the city was cut off from reinforcements, so the Tsume attacked with a huge army and took the city before reinforcements could arrive.

The attack was completely unprovoked, although the Tsume justified it by citing a recent insult which the Damasu had dealt them.  One of the bushi attached to the Tsume ambassador to the Damasu was caught smuggling opium into the city of Toshi Ranbo, and rather than turn him over to the Imperial magistrates to stand trial, the Damasu simply executed him.  This was highly improper as well as illegal, but the Tsume's response was hardly proportional.  Still, the insult was considered justification enough for the Emperor to refrain from intervening against the Tsume.

The Akodo made an attempt to take back the city with a huge army drawn from all across the clan.  However, in their rush to attack before the city could be re-fortified, the Lion failed to coordinate their forces properly.  Each general wanted the glory of being the one to take the city, and so they each threw all of their forces at the city, disregarding their battle plans.  When one general managed to breach the city walls, rather than redeploying their forces to assist her, the other generals instead continued to throw their forces at other parts of the walls.  They each assumed that the Lion would ultimately be successful, and no one wanted to be the general who failed to breach the walls themselves or be seen as riding on the coattails of another more successful leader.

Although the Tsume's own general was quite skilled, it was ultimately the leadership of General Doji Chuto that resulted in the Tsume's success in repelling the Lion forces.  Chuto was the General of the Northern Armies of the Crane and is an extremely patient and calculating tactician.  He discerned the lack of coordination among the Lion and adjusted his strategy accordingly.  When one attacking general managed to breach the city walls, Chuto predicted that the other generals would not reinforce him and instead focus on the more glorious goal of trying to storm other parts of the city themselves.  Thus, he deployed his men to fight the Lion forces inside the city district they had managed to breach, and only moved to take back control of the wall after defeating them on the city streets.

Further attempts to storm the city walls were ultimately unsuccessful, and eventually the Lion withdrew from their attack.  They had invaded too quickly to have established sufficient supply lines, and in the wake of their defeat at the hands of the Crane, the generals from distant houses saw much less chance for glory.  Before long, the attacking army dwindled as various daimyo ordered their forces withdrawn.

The Lion have not yet attacked again, but have not abandoned their claims to the city and have been biding their time and gathering their forces.  In the meantime, the Emperor reluctantly recognized the legitimacy of the Tsume invasion.  However, because the invasion was launched on flimsy pretenses, as a condition for legitimizing the invasion, the Tsume agreed that the Imperial magistrates in Toshi Ranbo would have expanded jurisdiction until the Emperor deemed that the city had returned to normalcy.

Toshi Ranbo is the third largest city in Rokugan, with a population of over 300,000.  The invasion was 3 years ago, and the city has settled down somewhat.  Martial law was recently lifted, and it's been almost a year since the last major riot.  The Imperial magistrate representing the Emperor is Hantei Fukuhachi, one of the Emperor's children by one of his concubines.  After a series of controversial rulings, he decided to spread out Imperial authority by appointing an Imperial magistrate to each of the city's districts.

Lion capital cities are traditionally divided into districts with walls separating districts and often separating neighborhoods as well.  Peasants wanting to enter, leave, or travel between districts need special papers.  Although this helps prevent crime, it's extremely stifling to commerce and trade, so the Crane have lifted all such restrictions.  However, the districts still represent a logical separation between areas of jurisdiction, so each district is governed by a captain, and each district has one of the PCs assigned to it as its Imperial magistrate.

Each PC has appellate jurisdiction over one of the districts.  Thus, instead of matters being appealed to the Minister of Justice, things are appealed to the PC assigned to the district.  A PC may unilaterally decide not to hear the case, in which case any earlier ruling will stand.  Or the PC may decide to hear the case, and all of the PCs will convene - this group of five Imperial Magistrates is known as the Board of Justice.  The PC from whose district the case came from gets 2 votes, and if there is a tie then Prince Fukuhachi must decide the case.

This campaign was largely focused around conflicts which can occur within this kind of setting - an occupied city, clashes of cultures within Rokugan, the 3rd largest city in the Empire, the tension between clan interests and Imperial personalities, new religious movements, etc.

As an example, here's what I wrote about the Prophet Baiten, who ended up being a significant figure in this campaign:

A radical monk named Baiten has been growing in popularity in the Toshi Ranbo province.  Baiten attracts fanatical followers who themselves become monks and go out and start their own ministries.  He's from southern Phoenix lands where he has spent a few years building up a ministry.  He has visited Dragonfly and Dragon lands and now has moved farther south towards Toshi Ranbo.

Baiten is controversial for several reasons:

1) He often urges peasants (mostly tenant farmers) to leave their homes and families to pursue a monastic life, usually by starting or joining some charitable mission.  For example, the daughter of one of the village headsmen in Hikobayashi raised some money and started a soup kitchen in a nearby city.  In some cases dozens of peasants from the same village or hamlet will walk away from their lives in mid-harvest to follow Baiten or to join whatever monastic communities he sends them to.

2) He preaches that the next Day of Thunder will soon arrive.  He says that he has no idea whether this will happen in a day or a year or a decade, but predicts that the forces of darkness are gathering.  Many samurai worry that this kind of talk will throw the peasantry into a panic.

3) His followers say that he's a prophet, that he has mystical healing abilities, that he's the descendant of Shinsei, that he has reached Enlightenment, and many other things.  Baiten himself tends to not deny these things, but not really deny them either, and many of the things he says or does tend to reinforce these beliefs.  For example, he claims to have the ability to interpret dreams, and many come to him to seek his wisdom in this manner.

4) Many of the monks and peasants he teaches end up saying or doing extreme things.  For example, the first round of censorship cases involved a follower of Baiten who went on a hunger strike.

A better example of Baiten-related controversy was the case which led to the Prince stepping down and instituting the Board of Justice.  One of Baiten's followers came to Toshi Ranbo and started a group devoted to educating peasants in religious songs and chants.  He eventually made a public speech in which he possibly said and/or implied (reports vary about precisely what was said) that the Prince would be like the next Iuchiban, dividing the Empire and aiding the forces of darkness through immoral and unjust actions.

This monk's followers denounced the speech and said that they had no idea he would give it.  However, the Prince still had every member of the group executed, which resulted in significant unrest.  Although Baiten himself was not directly involved in any of this, the Prince blames him for having mentored this monk in the past.

Baiten has never actually been to Toshi Ranbo, but he's making such a large splash throughout the provinces that the governor and prince have discussed how to handle him.  They fear the backlash that would arise if he was executed, but they are still considering it.  Alternatively, they may decide to have him imprisoned, possibly allowing him visitors and possibly not.  Most likely they would simply exile him from the province.  However, as of the beginning of the campaign they are planning on waiting to see what happens next, hoping that he'll move on and/or be less disruptive than they fear.

Some parts of this campaign were more mundane, focusing on local petty corruption.  The character of Doji Hirota is a good example of this:

Doji Hirota is a lieutenant under Doji Kanroku.  He is smart, capable, extraordinarily corrupt, and has a knack for inspiring loyalty in the men under him.  Because he is an extremely effective administrator, he serves as Doji Kanroku's karo, and he is the one who actually performs most of the logistical duties for the district.

The first large event of the campaign is a meet-and-greet party thrown at Doji Hirota's manor.  He has a large house within the city, significantly larger than the home of his captain, Doji Kanroku.  While Kanroku could certainly afford a higher standard of living, being the 6th son of Doji Kuwanen, he instead has a small home next to one of the district barracks, where he can remain close to his men both physically and symbolically.

At the gathering, Kanroku and Hirota will approach the PCs to inform them of a troubling matter.  Apparently there are rumors of corrupt magistrates in the district, who are either looking the other way when they see crimes or even possibly participating in muggings and shakedowns.  Kanroku is forming an elite squad of investigators to look into the matter, and because the PCs have expanded jurisdiction in the city, Kanroku and Hirota promise to keep them well informed.  The PCs will even be asked whether they want to be involved in the investigation, e.g. whether they want to be present when any major suspects are interrogated.  This offer is mainly intended as an inoculation against the PCs learning of these rumors on their own and taking offense at not having been told.

In fact, Doji Hirota and several dozen of the sergeants, corporals, and enlisted bushi under his command have banded together in an extensive criminal conspiracy.  There are several elements to the conspiracy:

1) When the city was first taken, much private property was seized and sold, either to incoming samurai and merchants or even sometimes back to its original owners.  Hirota and his men took advantage of this in several ways:

 - Many of the residency records were lost or destroyed when the city was taken by the Tsume.  As these records for this district were being assembled by the Tsume, Hirota stole many of them and claimed that they were never found.

 - Because local monks are responsible for tracking citizens in their area of influence, Hirota had the abbot for the largest neighborhood in the district framed and exiled from the city for sheltering peasants from conscription.  He then moves the abbot of the second largest neighborhood in to replace that abbot, and has the second abbot replaced by someone from still another neighborhood.  Thus, none of the abbots have longstanding ties to their communities, nor do they know the history and properties in their new areas.

 - Hirota forced out many peasants who were NOT slated to have their property seized, and distributed their properties amongst his men.  He also told many other peasants whose homes were not slated to be seized that they needed to pay a fee or they'd have their property taken; Hirota then kept and distributed this money amongst his men.

 - Hirota's own home was not actually bought legitimately; a large ex-Damasu merchant family bought the home with money they raised from their out-of-town relatives.  Hirota then had this family killed and took the home for himself, claiming that he was the one who bought it; because Hirota comes from a wealthy lineage, no one questioned that he would have purchased such an opulent manor.

2) The corrupt magistrates take kickbacks from the local criminals in exchange for looking the other way on illegal activities like smuggling, opium trafficking, and prostitution.

3) The magistrates shake down local businesses and extort "gifts" from them.  They don't directly threaten or attack merchants who don't comply; instead they'll arrange to have one of their criminal cohorts do something against the business, then make a point of observing the crime and failing to intervene.  This is something which Hirota has only recently begun, and it's the cause of the rumors.

Although there are many ways that the PCs could uncover Hirota's crimes, probably leading to an unexpected combat and subsequent arrests, they will have to really push to do so.  Kanroku has no idea about the conspiracy, but he trusts Hirota completely, and he'll be extremely offended at any perceived disrespect from the PCs.  This includes accusations against Hirota without overwhelming proof, as well as pushing to direct investigations and thus imply that Kanroku's men are incompetent.  So while there is plenty of evidence against Hirota and many who can testify against him, uncovering them will require either great forcefulness or great subterfuge.

We also wanted to "explore" life in the countryside surrounding the city, and most of the time this was set in the southeastern county of Hikobayashi.  In this part of the Empire, the capital is to the southeast, and therefore southeast is "the direction of the Emperor" and is therefore most prestigious, and the wealthiest samurai always place their country estates to the southeast for this reason.  Here's what I wrote about this county:

The largest of the counties surrounding Toshi Ranbo is the county of Hikobayashi.  Whenever something happens in the countryside, the GM should place the events in Hikobayashi unless there's a good reason not to.

In the years before the Tsume invasion, the county magistrate of Hikobayashi was Akodo no Damasu Atsumaru.  During the 22 years that he served as county magistrate, he earned a reputation among the peasants for fairness and generosity.  He was especially adept at mediating disputes between peasants, and his subjects never hesitated to bring their conflicts to him for arbitration.

A few years before the invasion, he retired to the life of a monk in the monastery just outside the town, leaving his daughter to succeed him.  When the Tsume attacked, they quickly took control of the town and its surrounding villages, searching the monastery and seizing those within.  The samurai in town all died fighting, but the monastery was seized and secured before Atsumaru even knew what was happening.

When Atsumaru's status as a former Damasu bushi was discovered, the Tsume came close to having him executed or exiled, but the abbot intervened on his behalf.  Not wanting to make an enemy of the abbot, the Tsume allowed Atsumaru to stay, after extracting his word that he would remain a peaceful and obedient subject of the new government.  Atsumaru explained that he wished to spend the remainder of his old age seeking spiritual enlightenment, though he said he would reluctantly pick up his daisho again and duel any Tsume bushi who took it upon himself to issue a challenge.

The position of county magistrate was eventually given to Doji no Tsume Horobinu.  He is adequate as an administrator, but is resented by the peasants for the troubles resulting from the invasion.  He's especially unpopular amongst the (admittedly small minority of) peasants who actually owned the land they farmed before their property was declared to be now owned by the House of Tsume.

However, because Atsumaru still lives as a monk in Hikobayashi, the peasants tend to bring their problems to him rather than the county magistrate.  Although his decisions don't technically carry the weight of law, he is respected enough that they are followed, even by peasants whom he's ruled against.

Here are a series of cases/hooks that can occur in Hikobayashi:

IRRIGATION IRRITATION:

A stream runs between two of the county's villages and is used to irrigate many of the fields in both villages.  As per usual, the water usage is heavily regulated, and is periodically reviewed and updated by the county magistrate according to the needs of each village.  However, recent deaths and movement have outdated the standing agreement.

Each village's farmland is entirely owned by a single peasant merchant family.  The two villages in question are owned by different families, and the one whose water rights are now disproportionately low directed the village headsman to take action to remedy this.

Typically in this situation, the headsman would have brought the matter before the county magistrate, but instead he and the other headsman approached Atsumaru for a ruling.  After careful consideration and surveying of the affected farmland, Atsumaru mapped out a new set of rights and restrictions, and both headsmen left satisfied with the decision.

However, the merchant family whose land lost more water was taken aback by the handling of this dispute.  Although they understood that they would have lost some of their water rights in any case, they took offense at having lost those rights by the ruling of a monk with no official authority.  They immediately took the matter to Horobinu, who instantly reversed the decision, carving out a new set of standards which took away less water from the losing merchant family.

The village headsmen and each of the farmers affected proceeded to completely ignore Horobinu's ruling and abide instead by Atsumaru's decision.  Officially, they accepted the official result, assuring Horobinu that the new irrigation he had okayed would be started right away... just as soon as the farmers could find the time to begin... although that might be awhile since they are already so busy with the harvest... but definitely later this year, or next year at the latest... unless the weather made things too difficult.  But they thanked Horobinu profusely for his fair and just ruling, which would certainly be obeyed to the letter!

Horobinu was furious at this insubordination, and immediately ordered Atsumaru to stop mediating such disputes.  Rather than dithering or giving false assurances, Atsumaru blatantly refused.  He pointed out that offering guidance to peasants is part of the duties of a monk, whether they're struggling with spiritual questions or difficulties of the material world.  He further went on to state publicly that Horobinu lacked the authority to order such a thing (a dubious claim, but not entirely without precedent).

This was more than Horobinu could let stand, but he was unsure how to proceed.  He strongly considered exiling Atsumaru from the county, but had several concerns.  For one, he worried about the reaction of the peasants; if a large public demonstration was staged, no matter how harshly he responded, it might make him appear to be a weak ruler, which might cause the governor to have him replaced.

Plus, Atsumaru has reminded everyone that Horobinu does have the simple recourse of challenging him to a duel.  Although he is no longer a bushi, he has previously stated that he would be willing to pick up his daisho if the Tsume decided to challenge his presence in the county.  Horobinu knows that he would be unlikely to prevail in a duel, and he worries about losing face if he exiles Atsumaru while appearing afraid to face him in combat.

So instead he has decided to bring the matter before the Board of Justice.  Since Atsumaru was a bushi from another clan, he can make a strong argument that this should be an Imperial matter.  And by having the PCs exile or muzzle Atsumaru, he can hopefully avoid looking weak or taking as much heat for the decision.  The PCs will have to decide whether to exile Atsumaru, compel his silence, or possibly whether to admonish Horobinu for poor leadership.

BANDIT HUNTING:

Assuming that Atsumaru is not exiled, Horobinu will eventually discover that he is joining the bandit hunting patrols conducted by the ashigaru.  What's more, he apparently helps them train to better use their weapons.  Evidently this is something that Atsumaru has been doing as a monk since before the Tsume invaded, and this is not uncommon behavior for retired bushi or even for peasant monks who know how to fight.

Horobinu forbids Atsumaru from training or leading ashigaru, but once again Atsumaru refuses.  He explains that he's not leading anyone, merely joining an existing search, and points out that his monastery's peasant monks have a long tradition of assisting with the martial training of the ashigaru.  Once again, Atsumaru publicly states that Horobinu is overstepping his authority as county magistrate.

So Hobobinu returns to the Board of Justice, explaining that this is a much more egregious act of insubordination from this rebellious and troublemaking monk.  It's clear that the peasants look to Atsumaru as a military leader, whether or not he's officially in charge of their training or patrols.  Horobinu asks that the council order him to leave and join a monastery in Lion lands to avoid these and also possible future troubles from his presence here.  

Once again, the PCs will have to decide how to rule.  Depending on their relationship with the city government, they can probably arrange to have Horobinu replaced, if they decide to side against him and don't approve of his leadership.  If this happens, they may also choose to recommend one of their district captains as his replacement - at least one of them will definitely lobby for the position, which is technically a demotion but is such a lucrative job that many bushi would still prefer it.

NIGHTINGALE BUSHI:

After the invasion, a number of peasants took weapons from the bodies of fallen Lion soldiers and left the domain, trying to pass as ex-Damasu bushi ronin.  Most of them ended up in the Nightingale Clan, a newly formed minor clan who have been accepting ronin and even elevating wave men to the samurai caste.  Niban saw through their story, but accepted them anyway, coaching them on how to pass as samurai, helping them memorize a long lineage to recite on command, as any true Lion bushi would, and educating them to improve their reading and understanding of the tenants of bushido.

Most of these bushi still send money back to their families, although they cannot bring them to Nightingale lands, as that would invalidate their stories of being ex-Damasu samurai.  However, they do visit their families on occasion, especially to fulfill their filial duties.  One such occasion is the Bon Festival, which is the Festival of the Dead.  The Nightingale return home to pay respects to their ancestors and visit their families; they bring their daisho but hide them in the homes of their families, since they obviously cannot carry them openly in Tsume lands.

During the Bon Festival, the PCs will receive an invitation from the county magistrate to a hunting trip and feast being held in one of the villages of Hikobayashi.  The exact circumstances will depend on their relationship with the current county magistrate, but the letter should make the offer very enticing so that the PCs will accept.  However, when they arrive at the village, they will be attacked by the bandits who actually sent the letter.

The county magistrate will follow standard operating procedure and search the houses from the surrounding countryside, looking for evidence of a larger bandit gang, especially looking for treasure and weapons.  The daisho of the Nightingale bushi will be found during this search, and the peasants will be arrested.  Although they seem to have no affiliation with the bandits who attacked the PCs, they still appear to be bandits by virtue of having weapons which it is illegal for peasants to possess.  The peasants claim that they looted these weapons after the invasion and have been planning on selling them, which is still illegal but much less severe than being bandits.

Since the Nightingale were out honoring their ancestors at the festival while this happened, they escaped arrest.  While the PCs are in Hikobayashi waiting for the real feast which the magistrate throws for them by way of apology, the Nightingale will approach them.  They'll explain that they are ex-Damasu who have returned temporarily to honor their ancestors and family who died defending the city, who are currently buried in the mass graves outside the city, which are indeed located in Hikobayashi.  They say that they paid the peasants to put them up, since they knew that as former Damasu they would not be allowed by the Tsume to make this pilgrimage, and swore the peasants to secrecy.

They will ask that the peasants be released and that their weapons be returned.  If pressed, they actually seem more concerned about the peasants than about their weapons, although they will explain their concern as a matter of hospitality.  If the PCs cannot be convinced, the Nightingale will attack them and attempt to take them hostage, although the PCs will have weapons and the Nightingale will only have improvised clubs and such.  Their fighting style will certainly reveal that they are not truly bushi, which would go poorly for them regardless of whether they win.

Because Toshi Ranbo is a place with people from every clan, we wanted to have non-Crane, non-Imperial characters.  We came up with a trio of Dragon magistrates, who we jokingly referred to as "the Dragon PCs" even though they were NPCs - we call them this because they acted the way that PCs usually act!  Here's the writeup for those characters.

A trio of Dragon magistrates has recently arrived and joined the staff of Mirumoto Yagura, the Dragon clan ambassador to the city of Toshi Ranbo.

Mirumoto Kiyoshi is a blunt-spoken bushi who doesn't bother to dress up his words in diplomatic language.  He doesn't go out of his way to offend, but when discussing people he freely offers his opinion, whether good or bad.  His observations are usually cynical, especially regarding the goals of the city government.  If given the opportunity, he will brag about his dueling skills, and he will be quick to take offense if provoked.

Togashi Ichiharu is an enigmatic tattooed monk who tends to turn everything into a question.  He tends to ask high-level questions rather than specific ones; rather than asking what the PCs think of a particular NPC, he would tend to ask instead what criteria they would use to judge that person.  He often deflects questions in this manner, though he'll usually end up speaking his mind when prompted, even if only indirectly.

Kitsuki Hina is the highest ranking member of the group, but sits and walks behind her companions despite her higher station.  She rarely speaks, but when she does her companions will immediately become silent and let her take over the conversation, at which point she will usually do all of the remaining talking, even answering questions addressed to her companions.  Hina is actually a far superior duelist to Kiyoshi, and she will end up being the one to answer any challenges directed at the group.

PIRATES ON THE DROWNED MERCHANT RIVER:

The city has recently had a problem with barges being attacked as they travel up the Drowned Merchant River.  An investigation discovered that the barges were all attacked in the same general location on the river, with the Lion clan on one side and the Dragonfly on the other.  Not wanting to cause an international incident over a few merchant barges, the Tsume decided to do nothing.

However, a local sergeant named Tsume Osamu was not satsified with this.  He was wary of provoking the Lion clan, but figured he could get away with risking an incident with the Dragonfly since they are only a Minor Clan.  So he paid some traveling merchants to journey to the domain and try to discover whether anyone there had unexplained wounds.  It's standard procedure after a bandit attack to check the local peasantry for wounded peasants, but Osamu believed that the Dragonfly magistrates may have been lax since the attacks are occuring on the river and don't involve anyone from their clan.

Osamu eventually learned that there is an ashigaru who recently came home late at night pretty badly beaten up, and no one whom the merchants spoke with had any idea how he got them.  Osamu rounded up some of his men and made a raid into that village.  They stormed into the hut where the wounded man lay sleeping and woke him with their swords to his throat.  Osamu demanded to know who his accomplices were; who was with him when he was wounded.

The man was actually innocent, having been mugged on his way home from market late last week.  He reported the attack, which actually happened the night before the most recent pirate attack.  However, he was too disoriented and scared and confused to properly articulate these facts, especially since he had no idea who these men were or why they had come.

In fact, his defense w as so jumbled so as to appear inconsistent to Osamu.  First the man denied everything sayin that he had no idea what they were talking about, then he explained that he had been mugged.  Eventually he tried to explain that he had tried to fight back but had been drunk, but the story came out as if he was claiming that he had been in a bar-room brawl.  Osamu took all of this as proof of his guilt, and demanded once more to know who had been with him.

The ashigaru mentioned that his cousin had been with him when he was injured, which Osamu interpreted as a confession.  Osamu was told that he could ask the man's cousin, who lived in the big house in the field adjacent to this one.  Osamu summarily executed the poor ashigaru and ordered his men to surround that house.

Osamu then loundly called out the bandits living in that house, explaining that he had come to kill them as punishment for their crimes, that their house was surrounded, and that they should prepare themselves for death.  The ashigaru who lived there rushed out with their weapons in hand to see what was happening and saw Osamu and his men, dressed in dark clothing with no clan affiliation visible.  They were quickly killed in the resulting combat, and Osamu returned to Toshi Ranbo, satisfied that he had done his duty to protect the barges.  He did not brag about his accomplishment, except to a few of the men under his command, since he knew that what he had done might be problematic for his House if it were to be made public.

However, the Dragon magistrates themselves were also investigating the barge attacks.  They ended up discovering the real culprits, who were actually living in Toshi Ranbo and following barges as they left the city.  The reason why the attacks happened along the same stretch of river is that's how long it took the pirates to catch up with the barges after waiting a suitable amount of time before following so as not to attract attention.  The Dagon magistrates confronted their suspects, who proceeded to attack them.  Those who survived the first few seconds of the combat surrendered and confessed to everything.  They were turned over to the magistrates and quickly executed.

The Dragon eventually learned of the Tsume raid.  (The specific cause will depend on other events of the campaign and should tie into the actions of other characters and relationships which develop.)  They confronted Osamu, who didn't feel comfortable lying about his accomplishment and explained the whole thing.  At this point the Dragons turned the matter over to the PCs, asking that Osamu be charged for his crimes.

Osamu truly believes that he was correct and that the peasants he killed were pirates.  He says they must have been in league with the pirates which the Dragon caught, and that those men did not point the finger at their accomplices out of a sense of loyalty.  The Dragon point out that they could have saved their lives by doing so, since turning in other criminals is one of the best ways to avoid execution.

The PCs must decide whether to charge Osamu, and if they do then whether to rule with the assumption that his victims were bandits.

Another non-Crane NPC is a Lion character named Matsu Yokijiro.  It's awkward, but not illegal, for a Lion clan samurai to be in Toshi Ranbo, since the Crane recently conquored the city from the Lion clan.  Here's the writeup of this NPC and some associated plot hooks:

Matsu Yokijiro started off as a county magistrate, and he highly impressed his superiors through his devotion to his duty.  He trained far more peasants in martial combat than is typical, and spent time giving personal instruction to all of them.  He evaluated their abilities and gave higher stipends to the ones who worked the hardest and became the most proficient.  In addition to fighting techniques, he also took great care and time to personally instruct and test these men on the teachings of Lord Akodo and Lady Doji and the Shinsei, working with the monks in his county to educate the peasantry about their moral and civic obligations.

He ended up challenging and killing the governor's Minister of Public Works in a duel, accusing him of having laborers imprisoned on flimsy pretenses just to beef up his workforce.  The skill he displayed in the duel, coupled with his well-known work ethic, prompted the governor to choose Yokijiro as his yojimbo.  Yokijiro accepted the position, and proceeded to throw his weight around frequently, calling out other members of the governor's administration anytime he perceived any kind of corruption.

He ended up being promoted to the daimyo's Ministry of Justice in the capital, both because he was seen as being tough on malfeasance and because his governor's administration largely wanted him gone.  Yokijiro took on the job of reviewing complaints about the conduct of bushi, and was incredibly harsh, both on officers who stepped even a little out of line and on peasants whom he felt were bringing meritless complaints.

In the process, Yokijiro made many enemies, and the Chancellary felt they had to reign him in on several occasions.  He balked at being restrained, and eventually he was promoted once again to the position of Family Magistrate in a faraway Matsu domain.  While there he was involved in several altercations with the locals, but the House of Matsu was happy to back him up in keeping this other House in line.  Eventually he got into an argument with the Clan Magistrate, an Akodo bushi whom he felt was showing undue favor to a clansman and making a blatantly wrong ruling.  The resulting duel in which Yokijiro killed the other magistrate was eventually ruled valid by Akodo Toturi, but the incident still strained relations between the Matsu and Akodo families.

Yokijiro was offered yet another promotion, this time to become a commander in the Imperial Legions.  However, he declined this promotion because he believed it would offer him few opporunities to fight injustice.  He judged that the Empire was currently too peaceful and orderly to offer many chances for him to use his abilities in battle.

Instead, Yokijiro decided to take up the wandering life, seeking out injustice and searching for ways to apply his strength and knowledge to help the Empire.  He eventually felt called to come to Toshi Ranbo because of the strife happening in the city.  He plans to start a school for any peasant or samurai who wishes to be instructed in the teachings of the Great Ancestors.

THE LION'S ROAR:

Yokijiro carries an exceptionally well-crafted katana named Akuzuki, sheathed in an extremely ornate saya.  One day while walking through the marketplace, he overheard a bushi comment on the workmanship and add a snide comment about how the sword seemed "too good for him".

Furious, Yokijiro showed his stance and called out the bushi, daring the bushi to repeat the insult.  After ignoring a few stammered attempts to avoid a confrontation, Yokijiro raised his hand as if to strike.  The bushi jumped back rather than attempt to block or counter, and Yokijiro proceeded to scornfully berate the other man for cowardice.  Eventually the bushi withdrew, and after hurling a few more insults, Yokijiro continued on his business, considering the matter to be settled.

If asked why he didn't challenge the man to a duel, Yokijiro will explain that he does not seek out duels, but merely uses them when appropriate to settled disputes.  Since the other bushi backed down, Yokijiro considered his own honor to have been properly defended.  He will accept any challenge to defend his actions, but none will be offered by any Crane in the city unless the PCs manage to talk someone into stepping up.

However, because of this incident, the district captain petitions the PCs to have Yokijiro ejected from the city.  He explains that although Yokijiro didn't necessarily do anything wrong, his mere presence in the city will surely lead to more incidents of this natue, which will be disruptive to the city.  The captain is further offended by the notion that Yokijiro apparently believes that the Crane clan needs some Lion to come and tell their peasants right from wrong, as if the Tsume are incapable of doing this themselves.

The captain will further call into question the safety of having such a Lion in the city, since he may have opportunities to sabotage or otherwise undermine the city's defenses.  If brought up, Yokijiro will immediately give his word that he will take attempt no such thing.  He explains that if the Lion do attack, he intends to immediately leave the city and join the attacking army, fighting honorably as a bushi should.

The PCs must decide whether to kick out Yokijiro; theoretically they should only be able to do so if they find that Yokijiro has acted improperly in some way.  However, it's unlikely that Yokijiro would win an appeal given the high rank of the PCs and his reputation for causing trouble, so the PCs could probably get away with ejecting him even without giving a specific reason.

BY THE BOOK:

If not ejected, Yokijiro will proceed with his plans to start a school.  He puts the word out, coordinates with local temples, and begins buying supplies.  One of the first things he needs is a large number of copies of Akodo's Leadership, which he orders from a book merchant named Hantoku.

During a staff meeting with his lieutenants, the district captain makes it known that he really wants Yokijiro gone and hopes that something happens soon that will give him an excuse to have the Lion ejected.  One of his lieutenants arranges to have Yokijiro's travel papers stolen from his pack at the inn where he's staying while he is eating breakfast.  Yokijiro did not immediately notice the theft since nothing else was taken; he carries his money on his person at all times.

In order to have a pretense for asking whether the travel papers were taken, the lieutenant tells Hantoku to ask to see Yokijiro's travel papers when Yokijiro arrives to pick up the books he ordered.  Although someone doesn't need any kind of license to purchase goods in Toshi Ranbo, it is customary to ask to see travel papers to see whom you're doing business with.  Hantoku didn't ask to see them when the order was placed because Yokijiro was obviously a weathy bushi.

However, Hantoku will go along with this request, asking casually to see Yokijiro's travel papers just as a formality.  Yokijiro will immediately realize that they are missing, but believes that he may have left them at the inn, since nothing else is missing.  Hantoku accepts his explanation and apology and sells him the books anyway, explaining that Yokijiro's word is proof enough, since he's obviously a bushi of high moral character.  Yokijiro leaves without suspecting Hantoku, who proceeds to report directly to the district captain that Yokijiro doesn't have travel papers.

The captain assumes that one of his lieutentants must be responsible for this, although he will never admit this.  He proceeds to confront Yokijiro and order him to leave the city since he lacks the proper documentation.  Yokijiro immediately accuses the captain of being behind the theft, which the captain denies.

The matter is taken to the PCs.  Yokijiro demands that the captain be forced to give his word that he had no involvement, either directly or indirectly.  In particular, Yokijiro demands that he give his word that he never made it known that he would want such a thing to happen, because Yokijiro knows from experience that this is a common way for officers to get their subordinates to misbehave on their behalf.  If the captain cannot or will not give his word in this manner, Yokijiro asks that the Board of Justice compel him to duel Yokijiro.

The captain refuses to give his word for anything, taking offense at the suggestion that he should have to, and angrily declaring that he will not subject himself to such an insult.  He asks the PCs to uphold his order to have Yokijiro ejected.  He explains that Yokijiro's threats and accusations are further proof of how destabilizing a presence Yokijiro is and why he should not be allowed to remain in Toshi Ranbo.

The PCs must decide how to handle the captain and/or whether to eject Yokijiro.

TOO COOL FOR SCHOOL:

Assuming that he isn't ejected from the district, Yokijiro's school goes well, and he easily attracts dozens of bright and interested pupils, including a few Tsume samurai children.  However, after a few weeks, several of the Tsume children drop out.  When asked, their parents are evasive and don't give a satisfactory answer.

Yokijiro believes that they are being pressured to keep their children away.  They had originally seemed excited at the prospect of their children receiving such advanced instruction at such little cost.  However, Yokijiro cannot easily investigate for himself whether their superiors are responsible for their change in attitude, so he asks the PCs to look into the matter.

In fact, these parents are being coerced by one of the lieutenants in this district, but will probably be unwilling to admit this to the PCs.  It will be difficult to get anywhere with this investigation, although it may be possible to discern what the lieutenant is holding over them; in each case the parent has an appointed position which results in an extra stipend that they have been warned they might lose.  For example, one parent runs the district's stables.

Of course, the PCs are under no obligation to listen to Yokijiro's complaint, and he will not push the matter with them if they decline to investigate, or if they do and don't find anything.

Another NPC from a different clan is Shinjo no Dorai Rakuo.  Here was the writeup for that character with an associated plot hook:

Although the provinces surrounding Toshi Ranbo have fertile land, they're mostly suited to producing grain.  As a result, the city imports a significant amount of rice.  Before the invasion, the Dorai House of the Shinjo family had a longstanding trade agreement with the Damasu to supply the city with rice, which they shipped yearly down the Drowned Merchant River.

Because the city has been so unstable for the past several years, the Dorai have not made the same arrangement with the Tsume.  However, now that martial law has been lifted and the city has settled into some kind of normalcy, they're considering coming back.  In order to get a better gauge of the state of the city, they've sent Deputy Minister of Commerce Shinjo no Dorai Rakuo, who will try to get a sense of the city and negotiate with the Tsume.

This is a situation where each PC may get some kind of directive from their respective clans about how to influence Rakuo.  The Shinjo family has been sending their rice into Ryoko Owari for the past few years, so the Scorpion clan would like to see him decide that the city is still too unstable.  The Crane clan would certainly like to see him come back, while the Lion clan would not.  The Unicorn clan would simply want Rakuo to be given an accurate picture of how stable the city really is.  Most other clans won't care, although certain specific Families or Houses may have some sort of stake by being allied or opposed to one of the factions involved.

Shinjo Rakuo himself will turn out to be quite interested in getting to know the city better, starting with its more entertaining places.  He will attend lavish parties of wealthy merchants and nobles, as well as geisha houses and even dens of ill repute.  This alone will probably end up with him having to interact with the PCs at least once as a result of some trouble he manages to get into.

Mostly, Rakuo is in the campaign to provide another interesting NPC who may end up interacting with the PCs and various other NPCs in interesting and potentially unexpected ways.  He may even end up getting targeted by Jama Manabu due to his well-known name and his proclivity for going into potentially dangerous situations.

HUNTING IN HIKOBAYASHI:

The PCs will be called to see the Prince at a small estate which he maintains along the bank of the Drowned Merchant River.  When they enter, he's sitting comfortably on a cushioned seat while fishing out a window.  At some point during the conversation, he'll get a bite on his line and hand the rod off to a servant to deal with.

The Prince will inform the PCs about the arrival of Shinjo Rakuo and invite them along on a hunting trip he and Rakuo will be taking at the far end of Hikobayashi county.  The trip will be an excuse to investigate the border, as there have been reports of Lion military activity there, including allegations of incursions into Tsume territory.  The PCs are asked to investigate these claims while on the trip.

The hunting itself will be quite pleasant.  The party will ride on horseback until the Prince signals everyone to stop and dismount.  Soon afterwards, a few deer will come bounding out of a nearby patch of trees.  Clever and/or observant PCs will discern that the Prince had servants waiting in the woods, ready to release these animals upon their arrival.

The next phase of the hunting is fishing, where everyone is given spears and posted along a creek, where the Prince expects fish to be plentiful.  Indeed, shortly after everyone arrives, fish begin swimming rapidly downriver to be speared.  Once again, the Prince has servants slightly upstream, ready to release already-caught fish.

One issue here which the PCs must decide is whether to out-perform the Prince in this expedition.  His initial shot at the deer goes extremely wide, and the PCs may want to emulate this so as to not embarrass him.  Similarly, he missed in his first attempt to spear a fish (although he succeeds at spearing the second one), and the players must decide whether to let the fish that got away from the Prince pass them by or whether to spear it themselves.

The PCs will spend the rest of the afternoon crossing the border to find and speak with the commander of the Lion forces there.  He will reveal that an ogre has been sighted in the area, which is the reason for the increased Lion presence.  He will deny crossing the border at any point, but argue that such crossing WOULD be justified if his men were hot on the trail fo the beast... not that this has happened... just that it wouldn't be wrong if it had.  The PCs must decide whether to condone or come down strongly on this attitude.

That evening, the hunting party will dine on the bounty of their hunt at a large hunting lodge close to the border.  However, after dinner, there will be an enormous commotion.  The Prince will enter the sitting room where the PCs are enjoying some fine plum brandy with Rakuo and reveal that the horses have been let loose.  Because the dozens of guards which the Prince brought along were all Crane bushi and the horses were all Tsume horses, the Prince believes that Lion forces may be responsible.  He explains that while the horses are rounded up, he has sent his yojimbo to summon the Lion commander, and he wishes the PCs to really grill him when he arrives to determine whether any of his men were or even could be responsible.

A few minutes later, after the Prince has retired for a quick power nap, the doors to the sitting room slide open and reveal a group of bandits, who look shocked to see so many armed men remaining in the hunting lodge.  Some of them are already carrying valuables which they have taken from the lodge and its attached barracks.  They immediately demand the PCs turn over all of their valuables, and a combat will quickly break out when the players refuse.

Rakuo will immediately declare, "I invoke my right of protection!"  This is a reference to the Emerald Charter, which requires that Imperial Magistrates are responsible for protecting foreign dignitaries.  Rakuo, as a merchant who is very unskilled in actual combat, will not participate in the fight unless he absolutely has to.

The only noteworthy thing about the fight is that the leader of the bandits seems to be incredibly skilled, and he has a very unusual fighting style which the PCs may not recognize.  He has the ninja profession, and he will fight to the death, even if his companions surrender.  Any survivors will reveal that he let the horses out to create the distraction and get most of the guards to chase after them, leaving the hunting lodge largely unprotected.

Although that resolves the adventure, there's another optional encounter which the PCs may have later that night, depending on the outcome of their encounter with the Nightingale bushi in the earlier adventure in Hikobayashi.  Those bushi will be found banging pots together and making a large commotion in the countryside.  When confronted, they will reveal that they are hunting the ogre which was spotted in the area.

They explain that they are flushing out the ogres by making noise, which scares them into running.  This is actually COMPLETELY wrong, but a popular play contains this strategy, and their ignorance may stand out.  Similarly, they will explain that they came to hunt the ogre at the request of the peasants who had been their hosts during their last visit, and they felt obligated to respond (even if they are not allowed in Hikobayashi).  If they have been banned from the county, the PCs will have to decide what to do about them.  Also, since the ogre was only first spotted two weeks ago, it's suspicious that they would be here so soon.  In truth they were here visiting their families, and if the players have not already figured out that they are really peasants who took up swords and posed as ex-Damasu, this may allow them to figure that out.

Speaking of peasants, here's some more campaign information which closely relates to peasants and some related plot hooks:

After losing Toshi Ranbo to the Tsume and then failing to take it back, the Lion don't want to fail again. To ensure victory, they are doing two things different from last time.

First, they're taking their time to gather their forces, making arrangements with daimyo throughout the eastern Lion clan to work out exactly how many troops will be sent, who will be in charge of each group, etc. These arrangements will include detailed plans for their supply lines to avoid their previous issues with troops being recalled when the invasion took longer than anticipated.

Second, they're sending a covert team of peasant mercenaries into Toshi Ranbo to blend into the general population and wait for the invasion. When the time comes, they'll launch a surprise attack from within the city, opening the southwest city gate for the approaching Lion army, which will send a large force on horseback ahead of their main army to reinforce the men holding the city gates. This will bypass the dangerous and costly process of filling in the city's moats, scaling the walls, etc.

For this plan to succeed, the mercenaries must be the best of the best, as well as extremely trustworthy. Akodo Kage, the master tactician who hatched this plan, personally traveled throughout Akodo lands, finding the best mercenaries from each domain. He made arrangements to hire them for a multi-year assignment from the merchant houses who employ them, as well as to have their families moved to a place where they will be closely watched as hostages to assure that none of the mercenaries would dare betray their assignment.

Of course, these "mercenaries" are almost entirely ninja, who typically make up the more dangerous and reliable fighters employed by large merchant houses. Kage actually understands just how sketchy such men can be, which is why he approach merchant houses asking for their best mercenaries, rather than approaching county magistrates to ask for their best ashigaru. These are exactly the kinds of men he wants to hire for this kind of covert work.

The man put in charge of these ninja is Matsu Hiroru. As the brother of Matsu Tsuko, the Matsu Family daimyo, Hiroru spends most of each year at Kyuden Akodo, along with members of the ruling families of the Kitsu and Ikoma. This is where he become the protege of Akodo Kage, who personally chose him to lead this mission.

Hiroru came to Toshi Ranbo about a year before the start of the campaign (roughly two years after the city fell to the Crane), and his men gradually trickled into the city in the following months. Hiroru is posing as a merchant named Uhiro, who runs a general store and employs many of his men. However, most of the ninja blend in by taking other work in the city as laborers. They take mercenary work whenever possible, though they avoid taking jobs which would take them out of the city, such as caravan guarding. 

FLOWER POWER:

Several female bushi will approach one of the PCs about a minor criminal case which is important to them. While walking home one evening, a flower girl was followed by two laborers who were making obnoxious comments and crude propositions to her. Although she did her best to ignore this, they eventually cornered her as they continued to leer at her and make improper overtures.

At this point, the girl attacked them, soundly beating both men quite severely, and continuing to kick them even after knocking them to the ground. Apparently the lieutenant for the neighborhood is considering charging her for this behavior, and the female bushi want the PCs to speak with him to prevent this from happening. They would further like the men who harassed the flower girl to be punished severely and publicly to make examples of them.

The PCs will have no difficulty persuading the lieutenant to rule however they want, since he would love to do a favor for such high ranking Imperial magistrates, and this case is quite minor and unimportant to him. The main purpose of this event is foreshadowing, since this flower girl is in fact one of Hiroru's ninja, which is why she was able to trounce those men so easily. If the PCs find this odd (it is certainly an unusual occurrence), it will be explained that she grew up with many brothers who were all mercenaries, and join in their fights all through her childhood. 

TAKE THE MONEY AND RUN:

One morning, an angry mob shows up at the homes/offices of every major merchant in the city who holds and lends money for peasants, which is about 2 per district. Evidently there have been rumors that these merchants are planning on skipping town with all the money they have, which would be good for the peasants who owe them money, but bad for all the peasants for whom they are holding money.

things turn violent at most of these "bank runs", riots break out, the merchants' homes are broken into and their money and valuables looted, and the magistrates have to show up in force to restore order. All in all, over 80 peasants are killed, along with about a handful of bushi. The city ends up getting mostly shut down for a day as everyone is ordered to return to their homes.

There are two interesting things that the PCs can learn about these riots if they investigate:

First, if they make a serious effort to track down the source of the rumors, they'll find that there's a single story which seems to be the source of the rumors. A peasant who works at a stables said that he spent the day loading up wagons and saddlebags for a moneylender, who is evidently leaving town suddenly and unexpectedly. However, the most noteworthy thing is that the moneylender being mentioned changes depending on where the story was heard. It further appears that the exact same story was told in many different places all at around the same time throughout the city. So it seems that these rumors were deliberately and maliciously spread to engineer these riots.

Second, if the PCs ask specifically for a breakdown of the casualties, e.g. who was killed at each location, they may discover that of the ~80 peasants who were killed, ~40 were mercenaries guarding the merchants, ~20 were killed while breaking into the merchants' houses to take their money, and ~20 were killed in the riots afterwards. This 2:1 of mercenaries to rioters being killed at each location is extremely suspicious, since one would expect highly trained and well-armed fighters to make a better showing of themselves, even while outnumbered.

These riots were caused by Hiroru's ninja at his direction. Not only did they spread the rumors, he had men at each location who were told to instigate violence if they thought they could get away with it. In these cases, his men maneuvered to the front of the crowd and when the time came, they used hidden knives to stab the guards trying to keep the crowd at bay, and rushed inside to help take out anyone inside who might be strong enough to repel the rioters. PCs with good investigation rolls who think to ask about the bodies of the dead before they're cremated may discover that several guards were expertly stabbed to death with extremely sharp killing weapons, which is not something that you'd expect from angry mob.

Once again, there's not much that the PCs could actually do to get to the bottom of what happened, but they still might get an inkling of what's going on, and this will at least foreshadow coming events.

LIONS, NINJA, AND TRUTH (OH MY!):

Matsu Yokijiro (discussed above) will sooner or later walk into the store run by the merchant Uhiro. Because Yokijiro was a high-ranking official in the House of Matsu, he immediately recognizes the brother of the Matsu daimyo. They look at each other for a few moments, which is all the time it takes for Yokijiro to immediately figure out what's going on. Yokijiro turns and leaves without a word.

As you may recall from "The Lion's Roar":

'The captain will further call into question the safety of having such a Lion in the city, since he may have opportunities to sabotage or otherwise undermine the city's defenses. If brought up, Yokijiro will immediately give his word that he will take attempt no such thing. He explains that if the Lion do attack, he intends to immediately leave the city and join the attacking army, fighting honorably as a bushi should.'

Yokijiro is a man of his word, and thus will never attempt to help this plot in any way. However, he did not give his word to actively work against any such plots, so he will remain silent about the whole thing. However, Yokijiro has the "Can't Lie" disadvantage, so if he is ever pressed on the subject of plots after discovering what his clan is doing in the city, it will be obvious to any skilled interrogator that he knows something.

This subject may be raised by the PCs themselves if they end up working closely with Yokijiro. Depending on his relationship with them, he may simply reveal that he has reason to believe that such a plot exists, is not involved in any way, will not say anything further, and will leave the city immediately if the PCs ask him to.

Another possibility, not mutually exclusive with the first, is that someone from the city government will end up pressing him on this issue and end up arresting him. This will cause the PCs to be approached by many different parties:

- The city government will request that the PCs authorize them to arrest every Lion in the city, which is basically a request to arrest the Lion ambassador and his staff.

- If the PCs aren't already incline to do so, the Prince will direct them to order Yokijiro's release. Before he took this post, his father the Emperor said, "Oh of only the Lion would simply take back Toshi Ranbo... it would make so many things so much simpler." Thus, Prince Fukuhashi will attempt to preserve the secrets of whatever Lion plots may exist in the city, in the hopes that they will increase the Lions' chances at retaking the city.

- Once it becomes clear that the governor will not be releasing Yokijiro even if ordered to by the Prince, the Lion ambassador may approach the PCs and ask them to help Yokijiro. Since the governor will not release him, the ambassador proposes that the PCs simply go to his cell to interrogate him, then provide him a wakizashi and offer to be his second in his seppuku. This would spare Yokijiro the possible indignity of torture as well as the shame of being perceived to have betrayed his clan.

The PCs have many options here; they can choose to side with the city government, they can back the Prince all the way, or they can be in the middle, perhaps supporting the arrest of Yokijiro but siding against anything more extreme such as torture or arresting the other Lion in the city.

Depending on how things develop, the Prince may ask the PCs to help him carry out a dangerous order; because the governor has openly defied a direct Imperial order (which admittedly has a nontrivial chance of being overturned if appealed to the Emerald Champion), the Prince plans to sign a death warrant for the governor and have him executed. However, this is impossible to carry out through the usual channels, since the Prince lacks sufficient bushi to overpower the Crane bushi in the city would would certainly side with the governor until such time as a higher authority than the Prince ordered them to do otherwise.

Therefore, the Prince plans to go to the governor with the PCs for a meeting, and then proceed to summarily execute to the governor on the spot, before sufficient reinforcements can arrive. Afterward, the Prince will order the other bushi to stand down so that this matter can be further resolved through some combination of dueling and Imperial decree. This is the really dangerous part, but the Prince feels that it's worth the risk and needs the PCs to help in order to pull it off; the Prince would not be able to take a comparably large number of bushi to see the governor without arousing suspicion.

This is one possibly climax for the campaign; although none of this ended up happening while Patrick and I were running things. Our PCs replaced the existing governor by someone more reasonable, and the PCs didn't press Yokijiro even after he gave some evasive and dodgy answers about Lion plots. However, I figured I'd still write this basic summary since it's an interesting scenario.

As we've discussed, a standard type of plot hook is a court case.  Periodically the PCs would be presented with various court cases, and the Board of Justice would convene to hear whichever cases were accepted on appeal by the PC serving as the Imperial Magistrate for the relevant district.

One of the first things that the PCs have to decide is how strongly to respect decisions which have already been handed down by a lower magistrate such as a district captain.  Most of the time, it's considered proper to let a lower ruling stand unless it's egregiously incorrect.  Rulings which are merely questionable are rarely overturned, unless the higher magistrate feels rather strongly or has some existing relationship with one of the parties involved in the case.  However, the PCs have expanded jurisdiction and may choose to interpret themselves as having a mandate to more heavily scrutinize the Tsume.  The Board of Justice will have to collectively decide their attitude on this question over the first few rounds of cases.

Here are some sets of cases:

CENSORSHIP CASES:

-> A Tsume noble has written a lewd play, which he claims is about the way in which people visiting large cities face temptation, but on closer inspection lacks much redeeming social content.  Doji Kanroku orders the play shut down, and the playwright appeals to the PCs.  Kanroku is the sixth son of Doji Hoturi, the daimyo of the Crane Clan, and has strong traditional beliefs that the play will "inflame the passions of [his] men, tittlating them into misbehavior".

-> The price of grains, especially wheat, has been raised several times over the past few months, to the point where it's a hardship on the peasants.  Some community leaders organize a protest against the high price of wheat, which is indeed higher in this district than anywhere else in the city.  Walking for miles to reach other districts just to buy wheat is a hardship, especially for peasants who already work almost from dawn to dusk.  However, the district captain has put a stop to the protests, and declared them illegal.  The peasants appeal to the PCs, asking them to deal with the pricing and/or to allow them to publicly express their dissatisfaction.

-> A monk has gone on a hunger strike to protest capital punishment.  He is a follower of Baiten, which Baiten's detractors make a point of noting, although Baiten had nothing to do with his hunger strike or even his views on the morality of executions.  To oppose the hunger strike, the captain has ordered his men to force-feed the monk to keep him alive.  The monk's abbot argues for the monk, although he himself doesn't approve of the monk's actions, he believes that it is imperative to respect his own spiritual journey towards enlightenment, and that it is inappropriate for the magistrate to interfere with such things.

-> Doji Isamu is a bushi sergeant who believes that the city's defenses are not being properly managed.  He believes that too much attention is being paid to the city walls and not enough to the surrounding countryside.  He has begun distributing pamphlets explaining why it would be better to create and maintain fortifications in the surrounding countryside rather than simply retreat into the city without any fighting or slowing the progress of an attacking army.  His superiors consider his criticisms to be an act of insubordination, and so his district captain orders him silenced.  He appeals this order to the PCs.  Because the PCs have appellate authority over such cases, they could theoretically order that he be allowed to dissent in this manner, but such a ruling would be HIGHLY irregular, and the body of case law is strongly against Isamu.  If the PCs do decide against him, he will commit seppuku in protest.

-> A Scorpion noble has written a play which is considered subversive.  It takes place before the dawn of the Emerald Empire, when barbarian warlords ruled with little regard or law or justice.  The play contains a monologue in which a bandit attempts to justify his thieving ways by railing against the unjust actions of his rulers.  Although this takes place before human beings received the gift of true justice from the Son of Heaven, the captain considers the play to be highly inappropriate, and has ordered it stopped.  The playwright appeals the decision to the PCs after shopping the play around and finding that most playhouses and acting tropes won't want to touch it for fear of having it shut down in their districts as well.

DEBT CASES:

-> Moneylenders in a district (and also to a lesser extent elsewhere in the city) are lending money in copper and requiring repayment in silver.  In addition to being generally sketchy, since it costs money to change copper for silver coins, it appears that they have colluded to make it very hard (by charging extra) for someone to change out copper for silver when their loans come due.  A community leader files suit and petitions the PCs to disallow the practice of requiring payment in a different metal than the loan as given.

-> Moneylenders are caught charging an illegally high rate of interest.  Their loans have already been adjusted to downsize the amounts they're owed appropriately, but a community leader files suit petitioning the PCs to fine the moneylenders and/or force them to pay restitution to their borrowers.

-> One or more cases will appear that force the Board of Justice to address the following issues.  The district captains have not heard any of these sorts of cases in order to not deal with the hassle and time and effort needed to deal with them.

1) In cases where someone has taken out a loan and paid back more than the original loan amount but due to interest he's still buried in debt, are the PCs willing to declare the debt repaid?  If so then, what's the threshold?

2) In cases where someone has taken out a loan and paid back some of the amount and fallen on hard times, are the PCs willing to grant them an extension to prevent them from being conscripted into forced labor to pay back the loan?  If so, then under what circumstances are they willing to make this call?

3) In cases where someone has taken out a loan and then tragedy befalls them and/or their family through no fault of their own and thus they are never going to be able to pay back the loan, will the PCs simply waive the debt?  Under what circumstances would this be acceptable?

4) Are the PCs willing to hire a clerk (5 koku per year) to review these sorts of cases and bring them recommendations to rubber-stamp?  If so, then who will they hire to do this?

HONOR CASES

1) Tsume Tsuyokatsu was out drinking one night and after getting fairly tipsy, accidentally spilled his drink on Tsume Akaharu, who was drinking separately in the same bar.  Akaharu was already extremely drunk and belligerent, and angrily shoved and chastised Tsuyokatsu.  This culminated in a fight, which Tsuyokatsu won by knocking out Akaharu.  He went on to brag to everyone present about how Akaharu wasn't so tough and had been dropped by a chump, whereas he was obviously a great fighter.

The following day, Akaharu challenged Tsuyokatsu to a duel over these verbal insults.  Tsuyokatsu publicly apologized and took back his rash words, citing his alcohol consumption.  He went on to publicly state that he could never defeat Akaharu in a fair fight, and that it was only due to the unusual circumstances (Akaharu's drunkenness) that he had prevailed.  However, Akaharu was not satisfied, and insists that the duel go forward.

As a formidible duelist himself, captain Doji Renshi agrees, and ordered Tsuyokatsu to accept the challenge.  However, Tsuyokatsu's father told him not to, and the matter is appealed to the PCs, who now must decide whether they feel the duel should go forward.


2) Tsume Soshitatsu is the third child in his family, and his parents decided when he was born that he was to become a merchant.  At birth he was betrothed to a girl from the House of Isawa, whose family also has a strong history of raising merchants.  However, Soshitatsu's older siblings ended up falling ill and dying when he was very young, leaving him as the only child.  His parents decided that he needed to be raised as a bushi; while they believe it's good to raise merchant children, they only do so when there's already an older child to carry on the family's obligation of military service.

The Isawa inlaws-to-be were not happy about this, since they made the marriage agreement with the understanding that Soshitatsu would be a merchant.  However, they did not break off the engagement at the time due to not wanting to instigate a conflict between their two Houses.  But recently Soshitatsu had to cancel his trip to Isawa lands to pay his respects to his future in-laws on a certain religious holiday to perform some duties in Toshi Ranbo.  His fiancee's parents took offense and cancelled the marriage, immediately betrothing their daughter to an Isawa merchant boy.

Soshitatsu is furious and has challenged the Isawa merchant to a duel, which has been declined.  He is now bringing this matter before the PCs in the hopes that they will compel the challenge to be accepted and/or help shame the Isawa for refusing.


3) Doji Chiyokami is a sassy bushi-ko who takes offense easily.  She came to the city only a few months ago and already has fought two duels.  The first was over a sexist comment that a fellow bushi made.  The second was because she discovered that she had been over-charged for a saddle.  In each case she won and killed her opponent.

Her captain has ordered her to stop issuing challenges without prior permission.  She refuses saying that this is out of bounds and that she was justified in her challenges, pointing out that her opponents could have withdrawn from their duels and been spared their fates, had they been willing to live with the shame of having been beaten.

Because the PCs have special appellate authority, this matter is being appealed to them rather than the usual higher-ups in the city.


4) Doji Miu murdered a fellow bushi in a fit of rage over an argument they were having which got out of hand.  She is scheduled to be hanged (a punishment usually reserved for common criminals) and wishes to be allowed to commit seppuku, or failed that wishes to be beheaded (as fitting her station).  She asks the PCs to hear her case and allow her a less undignified death.


ABUSE OF AUTHORITY CASES:

1) The city of Toshi Ranbo has recently started cracking down on traveling merchants who fail to pay for business licenses.  Toshi Ranbo follows the standard operating procedure for taxing traveling merchants; it's illegal for a merchant to come into the city and sell their wares without first purchasing a business license, though merchants can come into the city and buy things without being licensed.  Merchants who live in the city are required to demand to see a traveling merchant's license before buying from them.

Of course, local merchants might be offered a break on prices in exchange for not ratting out a traveling merchant, so the Ministry of Commerce conducts sting operations.  They'll send someone posing as a foreign merchant around to make this offer to local merchants, and when the locals go along with it, they're arrested and fined.  This fear of sting operations is designed to keep the locals honest.

Recently a sting operation revealed a warehouse that was supposedly full of un-licensed goods to be sold.  However, it turned out to have some unlicensed goods but mostly had valid inventory.  However, because it was a large warehouse, it took the magistrates quite some time to sort through everything.  During this time, a fruit merchant named Tatsutaro appeared with proper documentation and demanded to collect his fruit, which he needed to sell before it went bad.

The sergeant in charge in guarding the warehouse demanded a processing fee of 6 bu, explaining that his men were overworked and it would be too much trouble to take them away from their duties to tend to this man.  Tatsutaro explained that he knew exactly where his boxes were, that they were stamped as his property, and that he could remove them himself, with the magistrates only needing to give it a cursory glance.  The sergeant refused and continued to demand the processing fee, which Tatsutaro reluctantly paid.

Afterwards Tatsutaro complained to captain Doji Renshi, who refused to do anything about it.  So now the matter is being appealed to the Board of Justice, who should decide not only whether to order the "fee" refunded, but also whether to add a penalty or punishment to the sergeant and/or Dijo Renshi.  However, if the PCs decide to rule in the merchant's favor, Renshi will strongly castigate them, fishing for a duel.


2) Toshi Ranbo currently has a large garrison of bushi to protect the city from a possible second attempt on the part of the Lion to take back the city.  Because the city lacked sufficient barracks to house these extra troops, the Tsume quartered a lot of their men in the homes of local merchants.  All of the large estates were seized, but many small manors still exist, and they were packed with troops while new barracks were constructed.

At this point sufficient barracks have been constructed to house all of the city's troops, and so most private homes have now been empties of troops.  However, a few lieutenants have men still staying in private homes.  No compensation is being given, and the merchants' servants are expected to do laundry and run errands for the bushi.  The bushi have been politely asked to vacate, but they keep promising that they'll do it really, really soon and then not making any effort to leave.  The merchants have finally mustered the courage to appeal to the PCs to order the troops to withdraw, and possibly to provide compensation for the extra time that their houses have been used.


3) A district has recently made a large police action searching for opium, and the homes and warehouses of several suspected merchants were searched.  One tobacco merchant was at home when a rude corporal burst in to search his house.  The merchant was completely innocent, and when the search was complete, he angrily demanded that the corporal leave.  Not liking being ordered around, the corporal wandered into the kitchen where the merchant's wife was cooking dinner, and helped himself to some of the food.  Enraged, the merchant ordered the man out, but the corporal proceeded to fondle the wife's breasts.  The merchant furiously grabbed a kitchen knife and stabbed the corporal to death.

He was subsequently arrested and beaten by the other bushi present, his property was confiscated, and he was sentenced to several years of forced labor; he was spared execution due to the extenuating circimstances.  His family had to become servants for a rival tobacco merchant family.  Now his family is appealing for his release and compensation for their stolen property and unjust sentence.


4) Doji Kazuya is a sergeant who has arranged for a group rate for his men at a fancy bathhouse.  However, he has consistently either not paid or underpaid, making vaguely threatening comments about how the bathhouse should be grateful for the presence of so many bushi to protect him from unfortunate things happening.  The owner is fed up and has finally stripped these bushi of their access to the bathhouse until the bill is settled, and is suing the sergeant for the money owed.  The sergeant is claiming that the agreement was for much less money than is being claimed, and points out that this has gone on for literally years, so clearly the merchant really did value having his bushi around to protect it; now that the city is safer and he no longer needs so much protection he's within his rights to cancel their arrangement, but demanding back payments is ridiculous.  Any decent interrogator will discern that the sergeant is lying and just trying to get out of paying, but the PCs will still need to decide whether to acknowledge this.

JUSTIFIABLE HOMICIDE CASES

For these cases, it's important to understand the different ways which assaults and murders are handled in Rokugan.  Many magistrates consider personal disputes to be outside their duties, so if one peasant murders another because of a dispute between two families, the magistrate will usually decline to intervene so long as there is indeed a legitimate insult involved.  Other magistrates consider the motives behind a beating or murder to be irrelevant, and will arrest anyone who steps outside the bounds of the law.  The former attitude is extremely prevalent in Lion lands and is how the Lion magistrates in Toshi Ranbo used to rule, whereas the latter attitude is typical of Crane magistrates and is usually how the Crane magistrates rule now.  However, the population is used to the old ways and most do not even realize that the standards have changed.  Since the PCs have appellate authority, they have the power to decide which standard will ultimately be enforced for these and similar cases:

1) A day laborer who works at the city docks and has a drinking problem was stumbling home drunk one night when he knocked over a lamp, setting fire to his apartment complex.  Several residents died and the entire building burned down as well as parts of the adjacent buildings.  He was beaten and fined and assigned to two years of forced labor, but his life was spared because he had a wife and children, and because the local abbot intervened in his behalf.  He completely swore of drinking as part of his penance for this tragedy.

However, not long after he was released from his sentence of forced labor, he was seen stumbling home drunk again late one night.  He was confronted by a crowd, which proceeded to beat him to death in anger.  They were not punished or forced to pay any restitution for this, so his widow and children are appealing to the PCs for compensation, since the man of the family is now no longer around to support them.


2) A successful stonemason has recently married the sister of several successful carpenters.  However, it quickly turned out that he was abusive, so the woman's brothers confronted the man, and in the fight that resulted, they ended up killing him.  They have been arrested, but are appealing on the grounds that they were following their filial duty to protect their sister.


3) A man discovers that his 12-year-old son has obtained and smoked opium for the first time.  He thrashed his son and demanded to know where he obtained the opium, then went to confront the father of the boy who had provided it.  He angrily demanded that the other father beat his boy, and even threatened to involve the magistrates.  A fight broke out, and he ended up killing the other boy's father, which got him arrested.  He's appealing to the PCs on the grounds that he was perfectly justified in protecting his son from criminals and other bad influences.


4) A man's aging aunt suffered from dementia, and some of her neighbors worried whether she was possessed or even a witch.  One day while walking through town with her nephew, she temporarily got away from him and tried to walk off with someone else's child, believing it to be hers.  She was confronted and after the child was taken away from her, she was killed by a shopkeeper who was convinced that she was a witch, trying to abduct a child for some dark ritual.  The Witch Hunters later confirmed that she was not a witch after examining her body, but declared that the attack was justified because the populace should be ever vigilant against witchcraft.

Her nephew later confronted the shopkeeper, and a fight broke out between the two of them, and the shopkeeper was killed.  The man was arrested for murder, and is appealing the decision to the council, arguing that this is a personal dispute and he should not be considered guilty of murder.


5) Kyoude is a mercenary with a long reputation of honesty and great moral character.  His son has been raised and educated to become a clerk rather than follow in his father's footsteps, and has recently passed his gempuku and married and taken a well-paying job.  However, this job turned out to be at the largest geisha house in the district, where gambling and opium and prostitution are abundant.  When Kyoude learned of this, he ordered his son to quit.

He then went to the geisha house and confronted the owner, explaining that his son was NOT to work there anymore.  He went on to publicly say that if he returned to the city from his next caravan protection job and learned that his son was still employed here, then he would round up a few of his cousins and show up and kill the owner, along with anyone who got in his way.  He then left the city, confident that the matter was settled.

However, the owner could not bear the loss of face of having to capitulate to this kind of demand, so he beefed up his security and kept Kyoude's son, who wanted the high-paying job in order to provide for his wife, who is already pregnant with their first child.  When Kyoude returned to the city and discovered that his son was still working there, he rounded up two of his cousins and the three of them proceeded to storm the geisha house.  They killed all 10 guards to get to the owner, beat up (but didn't kill) a pair of Phoenix bushi who tried to stop them, then beat the owner to death.

When the magistrates arrived shortly thereafter, Kyoude explained what had happened to the lieutenant who arrived on the scene.  The lieutenant recognized Kyoude and decided to confiscate his weapon and tell him not to leave the city and refer the matter to his captain.  Evidently he didn't want to arrest Kyoude and approved of the killings, but he knew that his captain might see things differently and didn't want to declare the actions legal and then be overruled.

Kyoude and his cousins were eventually sentenced to death by the district captain, and the matter has been appealed to the PCs, who must decide whether to let them die, commute them down to a lesser sentence, or simply let them go with a pat on the back.


Another set of cases which can come up revolve around a new monk character who might come to the city partway through the campaign.  Here's the writeup I wrote about Grand Abbot Benshi and associated cases:

Baiten the monk will be banished from Toshi Ranbo unless the PCs expend a significant amount of effort and political capital to keep him around.  However, when he leaves, he will proclaim to his followers in the province that the Tao no longer prevails in the city of Toshi Ranbo.  Most of the monks in the city leave, along with hundreds of peasants and even a few dozen samurai.

Governor Yasujiro responds by requesting that Grand Abbot Benshi journey to Toshi Ranbo and bring with him dozens of monks from his order.  Benshi is the Grand Abbot of the Order of Sadahako.  The founder of this order was a prophet who used art and song and plays and stories to spread the Tao; Sadahako was later declared the Fortune of Artists by the Emperor.

In many ways, Benshi is the opposite of Baiten.  He is fiercely orthodox, he emphasizes that peasants stay in their place, he is a political thinker who involves himself deeply in the affairs of government.  In other ways he is very similar to Baiten; he is constantly testing the limits of what he can get away with, he gives provocative sermons, he is quick to denounce wickedness.

Benshi will become a major force in the city, and the PCs will need to deal with the fallout of his actions in a number of ways throughout the campaign.

OUTRAGE OVER OUTRAGEOUSNESS:

Grand Abbot Benshi will give a series of public demonstrations, each followed by a sermon.  He'll start relatively small and see what he can get away with, gradually escalating to more and more dramatic things.  In most if not all of these cases, he will even have local magistrates present during these demonstrations, who approve of what he's doing.

Benshi has his monks perform a series of controversial plays.  In one, the protagonist is a bandit who is a rather sympathetic character; although he eventually dies as a result of his banditry, he is a pious man who cares about his family.  Many object to such a conflicted message, feeling it gives the wrong message to the peasants, and the PCs must decide whether the censor the play.  However, no high-ranking official will be willing to publicly oppose the play, since the governor has mandated that city official cooperate with Benshi so as to not antagonize him.

Benshi's next play is even more provocative.  It involves several unscrupulous merchants who seem to be thinly veiled versions of real-life unpopular merchants here in the city.  They are eventually murdered by bushi as punishment for their moral failures; some of the bushi are punished and others are not.  Some local merchants are upset, feeling that this may be a call for bushi to take vigilante actions against merchants whom they perceive as sinful.

Benshi's first demonstration is significantly more outrageous.  A local wheat merchant known for price gouging answered a knock at his door to find Benshi and mob outside on the street.  They forced him to climb into a coffin, which they nailed shut and carried to the market square.  Benshi proceeded to give an hour-long funeral service for the wheat merchant, listing his transgressions and urging the audience to strive to avoid the same sins that led to the wheat merchant's downfall.  After a few hours they eventually let the merchant out of the box, where he furiously demanded that Benshi be punished for this outrageous behavior.

The following demonstration is even more extreme.  A landlord who often neglects his properties and fails to make even basic repairs is confronted by a mob of his tenants, led by Benshi.  In order to show that such greed is not acceptable, Benshi leads the peasants in "symbolically" running the landlord out of town... which consists of actually chasing him out the city gates.  The landlord returned to find that his office had been broken into and his lockbox smashed and the money there had been taken by Benshi and distributed to his tenants.  He angrily petitions the magistrates to censure Benshi and return his stolen rent proceeds.

Benshi has another demonstration which he'd like to perform but knows he could not do without express permission.  A wealthy sake merchant has a large estate outside the city, near the large expanse of rice land which he owns.  The tenant farmers who work this land have long complained of his unfair demands; for example, he does not allow the farmers who work his land to eat any of the rice they grow, saying that this rice is too good for them, and they should spend their own money to purchase rice grown elsewhere.  Benshi wants to soak the man's house in sake after kicking him out and have the farmers each light a fuse and burn it down.  However, this would require support from both the PCs and some high-ranking city officials.

These are just some examples, and the PCs must ultimately decide whether they approve or are threatened by this sort of behavior.

PROMOTING THE TAO:

Grand Abbot Benshi will proceed to conduct hundreds of interviews, questioning every corporal and sergeant in the city.  He will do many of these personally, though given the scope of this task he will delegate much of the work to his most trusted subordinates.  The interviews will primarily concern the Tao of Shinsei and how it is viewed and understood by these bushi and how they apply it in the course of performing their duties.

Benshi proceeds to recommend to each district captain which of these officers should be promoted or demoted.  Most of these recommendations will be taken, as per the governor's instructions to cooperate with Benshi.  However, some captains will end up declining to demote some officers from their own House, and declining to promote some officers from a different House, e.g. a Doji captain refusing to demote a Doji sergeant while demoting a Tsume sergeant.  This case will be brought before the PCs, and they will have to decide whether to try to compel captains to uniformly enforce Benshi's recommendations (the legal basis for doing so would be extremely shaky, but the PCs could always pressure the captains in other ways).

Conversely, the PCs may feel threatened by Benshi's attempts to insert himself into the power structure of the city government, especially by ensuring that so many members of the officer corps owe him their positions.  They may try to pressure the city to NOT accept Benshi's recommendations; the captains will appreciate this, but the governor will not.

TAKEAWAYS:

When presenting things like court cases, I try to make things interesting in a variety of ways:

-> NPCs will be involved with whom the PCs will have long-term relationships, and therefore their rulings will have social consequences.

-> There will often be no objectively correct or simple answer to a case, and the PCs must decide upon their values when choosing how to rule.

-> The cases involve conflicts between different parts of society, and often involve the interplay of social status with religion and culture.





THE PEASANT CAMPAIGN:

Another campaign I ran was the "Peasant camaign".  We've spent so long talking about samurai culture, but samurai are only 2% of the human population in Rokugan!  There's so much of society that is basically invisible to samurai, but is worth exploring, for narrative and worldbuilding reasons.  Here was my writeup of the peasant campaign:

Each of you will play a young member of a different family from a farming village on the far edge of the county.  You've each recently been licensed to carry weapons as ashigaru, which has several benefits.  You get a small stipend from the country magistrate for going on regular bandit hunting patrols.  You also get money from the merchant families who own most of the land in the county for doing extra patrols and odd jobs for them.  Other peasants will even sometimes come to you for help sorting out feuds and domestic disputes.

More than that, being a local ashigaru is often a stepping stone to bigger and better things.  After proving yourselves, you can eventually move into the big city in the center of the province, perhaps even eventually the capital of the domain.  Living in a city offers better jobs and lots of opportunities for financial and social advancement.

A big theme in the campaign is making decisions about how you want to advance.  For example, there are three different groups that you can build relationships with, and you'd have to decide which groups to throw in with from time to time, based on the situations you find yourselves in:

 -> Monks are the real moral leaders of their communities, however much the local authorities or rich businessmen may disagree.  Devout peasants (and often samurai) will often do whatever an abbot tells them, and so being in the good graces of the local temple means you'll always have friends in the community when you need them.

 -> Merchants can provide financial security like nothing else; many an up-and-coming peasant has grown rich simply by forging a relationship with a large merchant family.  Whether you're an honest worker whose integrity is highly valued, or a shady criminal with extremely useful skills, there are merchants who will pay uoi a lot of money for your services and stand behind you when trouble comes.

 -> Magistrates are the most capricious and arbitrary of these groups.  Many peasants fear to approach magistrates even when they haven't done anything wrong, because many samurai may be just as likely to punish those who report wrongdoings as those who commit them.  However, anyone who has the friendship of a magistrate can dodge all kinds of problems, whether it's other samurai who are abusing their authority, or even getting out of trouble for your own misdeeds.

Another thing you'll have to decide is whether and when you want to break the law.  For example:

 -> You can try to stay on the right side of the law.  This might mean passing up a lot of lucrative jobs, but it also probably means keeping out of a lot of trouble.

 -> You can go to the opposite extreme and take jobs helping smugglers, gamblers, drug dealers, murderers, etc.  This work can be incredibly profitable, but also carries a lot of danger of imprisonment and execution.

 -> There are plenty of opportunities for illegal activities that don't actually revolve around crime-for-profit.  For example, acting as a collections agent for a moneylender, assaulting criminals who try to shake down merchants, or conducting vigilante justice to defend the honor of family and friends.

Perhaps even more fundamental is the decision of what profession to take.  As peasants, you won't get a school, but will instead use the Profession rules, which you can find at http://courtwright.org/svn/l7r/rules/ along with all the other rules.  Every time you take a profession ability, you can take it from any profession (except Ninja).

 -> Wave man abilities help in combat and are extremely useful in advancing a career as a mercenary.  Since you're likely to get into at least a few combats in the campaign, I strongly advise taking at least a couple of these (in particular the one that gives you a bonus if you miss).

 -> Worker and Merchant abilities come with a Money Bonus.  This is still less lucrative than being a fighter-for-hire, but you're a lot less likely to get killed in the process.  If you really wanted financial security without a lot of risk, you could take mostly abilities with high money bonuses and save and live frugally.

 -> Taking a mix of these abilities may offer a good balance between being able to stand up for yourself in a fight and still having a bit of financial stability.  On the other hand, this approach won't turn you into Mighty Kyoude.

Other than what I've already listed, this campaign will be atypical in several ways:

 -> You'll gain experience very rapidly.  The campaign will take place over a period of years; we may jump forward months at a time, with a few brief descriptions and choices involving your activities over that time.  This chronicles your rise to riches and prominence and power within your communities, and this will be accompanied by cooresponding increases in experience.  Over the course of this one campaign, you should expect to go from ~50XP to somewhere in the 300 - 400 XP range, which means that you'll probably advance by 30 - 50 XP per adventure (though it's assumed that you're busy gaining XP between the adventures we actually play out).

 -> Because you're a peasant with limited education, many skills which are basic knacks for samurai will be advanced knacks for you.  Specifically, the etiquette, culture, history, law, precepts are considered advanced for your characters.  Heraldry is still a basic knack, but for you it will more give info on folks within your province, the local farmer and merchant and samurai families and the relationships they have with one another.

 -> One major theme in the campaign will be the surprising amount of freedom and influence that you can have even as a peasant farmer who's a newcomer to the big city.  But another major theme in this campaign will be how powerless you are; any kind of trouble you get into, whether deserved or not, can lead to you getting fined, imprisoned, or executed.  At many points during this campaign I will make a random roll and there will be some chance that you'll be sent off to forced labor for something you've done or failed to do.  Depending on what you did and how well you can explain yourselves and what things you've done in the past, these penalties will be larger or smaller, but if you step too far out of line then there will be a small chance of being randomly and capriciously executed, even if there isn't a lot of proof against you.  This campaign is thus a LOT more potentially lethal the typical L7R campaign; if too many PCs die then I'll have to scale it back a bit, since I don't want everyone to lose their character and certainly don't want anyone to go through several characters over the course of the campaign, but I do want to impress upon everyone that the danger of being smacked down by the authorities for stepping even a little out of line is very real.

 -> I'll be experimenting with a different style of adventure.  Instead of a long chain of events and encounters kicked off by some kind of adventure hook, there will be lots of encounters that start with the GM saying, "So while you're out on a caravan guard assignment and are resting in a provincial city..."  We may have lots of sessions where the entire time is taken up by lots of small adventure fragments rather than full adventures.  Similarly, a large part of the adventure we do have will be driven by random chance, like if you take a shady job then there will be a roll to see whether the magistates find out, etc.

Most of my campaign notes describe the plot hooks which occur as the PCs go through the following "rise" through society:

-> starting in the countryside in their farming community

-> taking jobs in the town

-> eventually moving into the provincial city and working for wealthy patrons there

-> taking jobs working caravans and dealing with the trials of traveling through the Empire

Below is my writeup of the plot hooks prepared for these various situations.

COUNTRYSIDE HOOKS:

These hooks take place out in the countryside, mostly in the hamlet / village district where the PCs live.

1) A feud exists between two peasant families, which has led to vandalism. The PCs are asked to intervene; they can lay down threats, they can report the matter to the magistrates (either honestly or with false testimony), they can stake out the property to try to catch the vandals in the act (very time-consuming and hard on the PCs both physically and monetarily).

2) Someone comes back from labor and kills someone for being with his wife in his absence. Everyone knows that he did this, although no one actually saw him do it. It doesn't get reported to the magistrate, although the monk and village headsman do know. The PCs must decide whether to tell him about the matter.

3) The local apothecary asks the PCs to collect some money that he's owed, with the caveat that they do so fairly and not collect from anyone who can't afford to pay. The PCs get to keep half of whatever they collect, and they have total discretion about when to collect and when to give the debtor a break. Several cases:
- folks who genuinely can't afford to pay
- folks who are borderline but have been going out drinking and thus are generally assumed to be able to pay
- someone who has basically no money at all, but who constantly fritters their money away
- someone who donated lots of money to the local country monk and now can't pay as a result

TOWN HOOKS:

These hooks take place in the town at the center of the county while the PCs are there for market day and working their weekly jobs:

1) A drunk monk starts a brawl in a bar while the PCs are working as bouncers. He is at fault and normally the PCs would just beat him up and leave him in the alley outside. But since he's a monk, the situation is more delicate.

2) The PCs are working security at a large outdoor play, and the acting troupe asks them to help skim money off the top to cut out the merchant house.

3) There is a run of wheat seed while the PCs are on duty working at a large teahouse. In order to buy the wheat seed they were planning on buying after they were finished with their shifts, they would have to walk away from their shift, which would not only forfeit their wages for the day, but would potentially affect their reputations. On the other hand, waiting another week to plant their wheat will affect their harvest negatively by much more than a single shift's wages.

4) While the PCs are working security at a large restaurant, a servant gets the order wrong for a merchant who is wining and dining a local bushi. The merchant begins beating the servant mercilessly, while the samurai looks on disapprovingly. The PCs must decide whether to intervene and how to handle the aftermath.

GRIFTS AND SCAMS:

During one of the adventures, the PCs will meet a pair of traveling merchants named Shinjiro and Tsubasa who will ask the PCs to help them with a series of business endeavors, which are increasingly sketchy.

First, they explain that they are running a gambling game in an alleyway on market day, and want the PCs to help them attract players. Since folks are more likely to want to play in a game where others are already playing, the PCs will be given some money to gamble with, and then they'll return whatever they have at the end of the evening. The PCs will win a lot and the other players less so (the dice being used by the PCs are weighted to help them win, while the dice used by the other players are unweighted, though the odds on the game are very biased towards the house).

The next endeavor is to attempt to sell a teacup using the classic "violin" grift. Instead of describing the grift myself, I'll just link to the TVTropes page: tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/ViolinScam

The third time they have a more involved plan. They are acting as guards for a merchant traveling all the way to Kyuden Bayushi, but this merchant is paying them only a pittance, though he has agreed to give them hazard pay if they run into trouble on the road. Thus, the PCs are asked to cause some trouble on the road in order to force this merchant to give out this hazard pay. Specifically, the PCs will cut down a tree just before the merchant arrives at a certain point on the road, then refuse to move aside or hurry Weakgs up to clear the tree from the road. The PCs will be belligerent and insulting towards the merchant and block any attempt to carry his cart over the tree. The idea is for the merchant to ask Shinjiro and Tsubasa to chase the PCs away, agreeing that this is hazardous enough to warrant giving them the hazard pay. (If the PCs are inclined to try their hand at banditry, they could use the information about where the merchant will be to launch an attack and steal his goods and money.)

CITY HOOKS:

These hooks take place after the PCs have moved into the provincial city of Koishi and started working for a large merchant family:

1) While working at a bar/restaurant for samurai (The Reflected Moon), a drunk samurai begins to loudly bemoan the hassle that everyone in the city is being put through by the Minister of War, who's demanding an accounting of all suits of armor in the entire city. Unfortunately, the Deputy Minister of War is sitting at a table on the other side of the wall and can hear everyWeakg being said. The PCs must decide whether and how to inform the drunk samurai of this fact. Furthermore, the Deputy Minister will soon order a large trough of a sour and spicy sobering soup to be sent to the table of the drunk samurai, and the PCs must decide how to react to this as well, deciding whether to try to prevent this from escalating further.

2) The Reflected Moon is packed one night when the governor's sister arrives with a large party of her friends. There isn't enough space for them, so the owner identifies the lowest ranking samurai and tells the PCs to get them to leave. The samurai refuse politely but are not belligerent or confrontational, forcing the PCs to decide whether to forcefully eject them or try someWeakg else. In particular, the samurai identify another samurai who they say is undeserving of his seat and offer to help the PCs eject that customer instead. To complicate matters further, if the PCs have chosen the "low" category for their neighborhood, then these samurai are responsible for patrolling the PCs' neighborhood!

3) The PCs are asked to help collect a debt from a samurai who has been delinquent on his bills to the Reflected Moon. They are told to put up posters on the outside walls of his home explaining that he's a debtor and refuses to pay, and to guard those posters to prevent them from being taken down. There will be several responses to this:
- The samurai's servants will come out with gardening implements and threaten to attack the PCs. They explain that although they know that they will lose, it's unlikely that the magistrates will be on the side of the PCs if they've beaten two servants for defending their home. This is probably a bluff, but they might be serious.
- The samurai will find some magistrates responsible for patrolling the PCs' neighborhood and get them to come and have a chat with the PCs, making threatening remarks about either arresting them and/or making them worry about their home while they're away.
- The samurai will appear himself, walking into the alley across from his home and stringing his bow. He might be bluffing and in this case will just shoot towards the PCs without hitting them, but he might also be serious and really trying to kill them if they do not flee.

4) The PCs are assigned to guard a geisha house, introducing them to a business much different than The Reflected Moon. While on duty, a wealthy samurai approaches them, explaining that he has accidentally ripped the kimono of his favorite geisha. Someone must pay for this, but he suggests a way for this to be someone else. This geisha can wait for a drunk samurai to round a corner and bump into her, causing her to scream and fall backwards, ripping her kimono. The PCs will immediately eject him for his inappropriate behavior and blame him for ripping the kimono, for which they will be paid an entire koku to split amongst themselves.

CARAVAN HOOKS:

These hooks take place after the PCs have gained enough seniority that they begin to go on caravan trips as guards.

1) While eating in a busy restaurant, the caravan master becomes increasingly annoyed at how long it's taking to be served.  He reasons that this is because they are from out of town and that the kitchen is prioritizing regulars over him.  He orders the PCs to barge into the kitchen and stand there while they attend to his food to ensure quicker service.  This has the potential to go very badly and even break out into violence or arrests, but the caravan master doesn't care.

2) While staying in a flophouse, some other caravan guards witness some gamblers winning a lot of money from some farmers.  The guards believe the gamblers might have been cheating, though they cannot prove it, and they certainly heard them lying about the odds to the uneducated.  The guards decide to attack the gamblers and return their illegal gains to the farmers, along with a warning not to gamble.  The PCs must decide whether to help, try to stop this from happening, or just not get involved.

3) While crossing a bridge, the bridge collapses, sending several wagons full of tea into the river below.  The caravan master offers a 1 koku reward for every crate of tea saved.  This leads some who are bad at swimming to try to jump into the river, and the PCs might have to decide whether to go after tea crates of their fellow caravan guards.

As their three wagons are separated from the rest of the caravan, the PCs are confronted by a bandit gang, who apparently sabotaged the bridge.  They demand one of the wagons as tribute, and the PCs have to decide whether to fight or capitulate.

PRISON CAMP HOOKS:

The PCs may end up going to a prison labor camp for some amount of time, depending on how often they break the law.  If they do, they'll meet some fellow prisoners with a lot more freedoms than most of the laborers, who will offer to cut them in on some arrangements they have with some unscrupulous guards.

1) One of the bushi guards has a minor post working for the local County Magistrate.  He lends the PCs a valuable bracelet and tells them to try to sell it to a local vendor for well below it's apparent value.  The bushi will then accost the vendor with the PCs "in custody" as thieves and search the vendor to find the stolen goods.  A bribe will then be solicited for the vendor to avoid arrest.

2) Some samurai kimono, daisho, and travel papers have come into the posession of some of these labor camp prisoners (they decline to say how, though it should be obvious that they were probably murdered).  The PCs are instructed to don the kimono and run towards a peasant in the countryside to commandeer their horses for an emergency, claiming the horses will be returned later.  The peasants will probably accept this unless they are willing to risk the wrath of samurai, and then the PCs can turn the horses over to their confederates for sale.

Using the aforementioned travel papers, the PCs are instructed to visit some local merchants and take out a sizable loan.  This should work, so long as the PCs have enough education to fool the canny merchants into thinking they're really traveling samurai from another House.

3) If the PCs prove willing and trustworthy, they may be asked to commit a murder.  They have the perfect alibi, since they will officially by in the labor camp during the time of the murder, and both their guard and fellow inmates will vouch for them.

TAKEAWAYS:

I mentioned before that peasants lead interesting lives, and the main point of this campaign was the drive that home!  We had just as much fun playing as farmers as when we were playing as samurai, and I think that reflects not only the worldbuilding of Rokugan but also an important point about how the narrative isn't only interesting when it's about the wealthy and powerful.





OATHS AND VOWS:

Now that we've talked about a few specific campaign settings, let's talk about some of the religious underpinnings of Rokugan and its cosmology.

I've heavily incorporated oaths and vows into my game.  The main difference here between the two is that an oath is sworn by a god, while a vow is sworn to a god or some other type of divine being.  This has several implications, chiefly that an oath is something that the person you swore it to can release you from, but since a vow is sworn to a god, only the god can release you.  This means that oaths can be temporary even if they were originally intended to be permanent, whereas you cannot be freed from a vow.

In my setting, I impose a certain format for oaths and vows, which is admittedly based more on the Roman world than Japan.

Oaths and vows should begin by whoever is swearing it naming themself unambiguously, in order for the fortune to not accidentally confuse the wrong person - in some cases this will involve someone naming their parents or saying where they come from.  Then they declare the god they are swearing by (for an oath) or swearing to (for a vow).  Finally they declare what they are swearing.

Here's an example of how this applies to the Legionnaire's Oath, an oath of office sworn by those who join the Imperial legions.  Most Imperial legionnaires swear the standard Imperial Legionnaire’s Oath, which has 3 parts:

1) The legionnaire states their name, family, and position. For some clans, the listing of position is as simple of naming their previous post or formal rank, while other clans take this opportunity to state their personal deeds – the amount of time allotted for this would depend on the rank of the legionnaire involved. The amount of ancestry stated varies by clan and family as well; some Lion families state their entire lineage back to the Great Ancestors and their vassals, while others actually swear by each ancestor individually in the second part of the oath.

2) The naming of who the oath is being sworn by. All Imperial legionnaires must swear this oath “by Lady Sun, and by my ancestors”, but some legionnaires insert their family patron gods, or particular fortunes whose favor they seek. In addition to swearing by these entities, some legionnaires may swear on a particular artifact, such as a famous sword they carry or an ancestral heirloom which is part of the legion.

3) The legionnaire ends with the standard formula for the legionnaire’s oath, swearing:

"that I shall faithfully execute all that the Emperor commands, and that in so doing I shall never seek to avoid death."

As an example of all three parts put together:

"I am Shosuro no Michio Noritaka, son of Ukon and Minon, of the lineage of Shosuro no Michio Yusuke. From the ranks of yoriki of the Thunder Guard of Ryoko Owari, I swear by Lady Ameterasu, by my ancestors, and by Bishamon, that I shall faithfully execute all that the Emperor commands, and that in so doing I shall never seek to avoid death."

Higher-ranking officers need to do more than simply follow orders, so higher-ranking officers swear a different oath. Corporals and sergeants mostly swear the standard Legionnaire’s Oath, but Platoon Lieutenants must swear:

"that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to His Imperial Majesty the Emperor and his successors, that I shall marshal his troops as he commands, and that in so doing I shall never seek to avoid death."

Company captains swear an even longer form of this oath, being required to swear:

"that I will be a true and faithful servant to His Imperial Majesty and Son of Heaven the Emperor and his successors. I shall truely and faithfully show the utmost respect for my duty, and without fear I shall everywhere and in every situation defend the inviolability of the Empire. I will marshal his troops as he commands, and in so doing I shall never seek to avoid death."

Battalion commanders and Legion generals swear even longer oaths, which depending on the particular duties of the legion and their assignments may draw from the oaths of office from any or all the 6 ministries, with these being examples from those other oaths which may be pulled in to form the Officers’ oaths:

→ I shall avoid any and all actions which are injurious to the functioning of a well-ordered society.

→ I possess pure faith and obedience to Emperor and shall preserve, support and secure the Empire without being affected by fear, mercy, love or hatred.

→ I shall discharge strictly and conscientiously the lofty duties that have been bestowed upon me.

→ I will promote the general welfare of the Empire.

→ I will be responsible for my subordinates by becoming an example, building morale and confidence, and making right and honest decisions.

→ I will devote myself to the glory of the Empire, promotion of righteousness, and the propagation of justice.

→ I shall guard righteousness and undertake to be diligent in seeking truth and justice.

→ I will hold the good of the Emperor and the prosperity of his subjects as my supreme obligation.

→ I will always preserve the Empire with my eyes, soul, thoughts, and care, and my mind will only be centered on the Emperor’s commands to promote the public good.

→ I will promote peace and harmony among the Emperor’s subjects, and day and night I shall be the most vigilant custodian of his land.

→ I will always promote all that will advance the Empire and oppose all that may harm it.

Note the pattern that oaths sworn by large numbers of people are usually fairly simple, and they get more and more complicated for higher-ranking positions.  For example, here is the oath of office sworn by the Damasu Minister of Works (the Damasu is a vassal family of the Akodo family of the Lion clan).

"I, [name], do solemnly swear by Daikoku, the Fortune of Wealth, Koshin, the Fortune of Roads, and in the light of our radiant Lady Sun, to faithfully execute my duties as the Minister of Works for the Damasu domain.

I pledge my diligent efforts to the construction and preservation of public works, fostering the prosperity and security of our domain.

Guided by duty and unwavering loyalty to our honorable Daimyo and the Emperor, I will uphold my responsibilities without fear, favor, or prejudice.

I commit to be an exemplar for my subordinates, encouraging their dedication and making honest decisions for the benefit of our domain and the Empire at large.

With this solemn oath, I swear to put the welfare of the Emperor’s subjects and the prosperity of the Damasu domain above all else, diligently working for its advancement and diligently safeguarding against any harm that may befall it.

I swear this oath freely, my heart pure and my intentions sincere, in the name of Daikoku, Koshin, and our radiant Lady Sun."

Note that the oath not only references the duties and responsibilities of the position, but also the challenges which the Minister expects to face in office.  This is similar to how the legionnaire's oath promises to never attempt to avoid death, which references the challenges which legionnaires are expected to face in their military service.

As another example, here is the oath of office sworn by the Damasu Minister of Retainers:

"I, [name], do solemnly swear by Hachiman, the Fortune of Loyalty and Honor, by Shinsei, who exemplifies humility and wisdom, and in the light of our radiant Lady Sun, to serve faithfully as the Minister of Retainers for the Damasu domain.

I pledge to uphold my responsibilities, managing the personnel of our domain with diligence, fairness, and integrity. I will place the needs of our honorable Daimyo, our dedicated samurai, and our loyal subjects above my own, fostering unity, dedication, and obedience within our ranks.

I commit to the duty of preserving the samurai tradition and ensuring its continuity, guiding our samurai in their dedication to the code of Bushido, their service to our Daimyo and the Emperor, and their commitment to the welfare of our domain and the Empire.

I will act as an exemplar for all samurai under my authority, leading with wisdom, fairness, and honor. I will make decisions with utmost honesty and impartiality, striving always for the prosperity and security of the Damasu domain and the Empire at large.

I swear this oath freely, with sincerity and a pure heart, in the name of Hachiman, Shinsei, and our radiant Lady Sun."

I can provide additional examples of oaths, but next I'd like to talk about vows.  Like the original L5R books, I've "sourced" a lot of the information to in-universe books, such that information is provided through "primary source documents" (or descriptions of the contents of those primary source documents).

"On Vows to the Fortunes" is one of the fictional books from Rokugan which I use to educate players on vows and how they work.  Here's some information about that:

"This book was originally published by Isawa Akuma, who was later discovered to have stolen it from the Great Library. It’s true authorship is unknown. Anyone who discovers a copy of this book without this disclaimer is ordered to report it to the office of the Jade Champion."

The above disclaimer is at the front of several books published by Isawa Akuma many centuries ago, including this one. Akuma was a powerful shugenja who was also the greatest scholar of his generation, which is unusual since it’s practically unheard of for masters of magic to also be masters of scholarship. However, it later turned out that Isawa Akuma had used his great name to summon an oni lord (Oni no Akuma), who took the form of a Great Library hidden deep in the Isawa Woodlands. This library is said to contain “all of the things which have ever been written, and many of the things which never were written, and more than a few things which will come to be written”. It cannot be found the same way twice, and therefore is very difficult to reach.

Akuma published a number of works of scholarships written by people who were never born, or possibly which would have otherwise not come to be written for centuries, attributing these works to himself, which fueled his name even further. Notably, Akuma is only one of two shugenja in history capable of practicing maho and thus taking on the Shadowlands taint without losing their shugenja abilities – the taint is hateful to the elemental kami and all other shugenja who have practiced maho have lost their powers as a result. Akuma is one of only three shugenja who has achieved immortality, though presumably he did this though dark rituals rather than gaining the favor of the kami.  (I have more information on Isawa Akuma which I will provide later, which does not directly relate to vows.)

On Vows to the Fortunes is still considered the foundational work of scholarship on the subject of vows, despite its origins, which speaks to its quality.  Here is some of the most salient information it contains.

→ The fortunes reward those who are devoted to them. This devotion is defined as shaping your thoughts and decisions and actions around being in tune with the fortunes, keeping them and their will in mind at every moment.

→ There are a thousand fortunes, though this number is probably not literal, and should be taken to mean “a large number, but still finite and theoretically within the ability of the human race to count and record”. This is too many for any one person to keep in their head at all times. Therefore, humans do not displease any fortune by our neglect, so long as we do not act contrary to their wishes or actively reject their importance.

→ We gain the favor of the fortunes by focusing on individual, specific fortunes and behaving in accordance with their wishes and nature. Humans are only capable of doing this with a few fortunes at a time – the upper limit of different fortunes that the human mind can act in conscious accordance with is thought to be 7, and most people are advised to pick a much smaller number when swearing vows.

→ Counterintuitively, swearing a vow to the Fortunes does not actually gain their favor in any way, while breaking a vow angers them and brings misfortune to the vowbreaker. With this in mind, why swear a vow at all? The answer is that swearing a vow forces you to orient your thoughts around maintaining your vow until it becomes second nature to you. Living and abiding by your vow will then become part of your natural state of mind, and that will gain you the favor and blessings of the fortunes.

→ Theoretically a person could achieve a similar result without swearing a vow, but in practice it doesn’t usually work that way. For example, if you choose to not swear a vow because that gives you the option of acting in ways that might theoretically break such a vow, then you will gain less favor with the fortunes even if that sort of situation never comes up.

→ There are many recorded cases of people gaining the blessings of the fortunes without having taken vows of any kind, though this is most commonly among peasants who didn’t even know that swearing a vow was an option available to them, and who wouldn’t have known how to do this properly in any case.

→ There are a number of generic vows that can be sworn to many different fortunes, with different significance depending on the fortune being sworn to. Note that vows can be sworn to any divine being, not just the fortunes, e.g. to Lady Sun, though most vows are sword to one or more of the Thousand Fortunes.

→ In general, it's far worse to swear a vow and break it than to have never sworn a vow at all.  And swearing a vow to do things you don't find difficult doesn't have much benefit, since if you don't need to reshape your thoughts around following the vow then it will not gain much favor with a fortune.  This makes vows inherently somewhat risky - in order to be meaningful or significant they must be difficult, but the more difficult they are the more likely you are to break your vow and be worse off than you were before.

→ Because of this dynamic, a standard piece of advice is to practice operating under the burden of an especially difficult vow before you actually swear it, in order to ensure that you will be able to keep it.  Religious institutions should prevent new members from swearing vows until they have been tested, to ensure that newcomers do not bring ruin to themselves and to their entire orders by swearing and then breaking vows.

Another in-universe work of literature which teaches people in Rokugan about vows is the book "Benten's Blessing" by Doji Shizue.

Doji Shizue was a storyteller who lived three centuries ago. Swept up in political machinations in Otosan Uchi (the capital of the Empire), Shizue was falsely accused by her family’s enemies of plots contrary to the interest of the Emperor. Being innocent, there was no evidence or direct testimony to support these allegations, but Shizue was banished from the capital and from her homelands. A series of misfortunes befell those who had conspired against her, while she herself went on a pilgrimage to learn the ways of the fortunes and come closer to enlightenment.

Upon her exoneration, she returned to the capital and became the Imperial Matchmaker, having won the favor of Benten (the fortune of romantic love) in her travels. The play Doji Shizue and the Secrets of Calligraphy recounts her tale and is considered one of the great classics – all of the PCs have certainly seen this play.

Shizue’s work contains many ruminations on what is and isn’t pleasing to Benten. In some cases, this is common sense – falling in love, getting married, having children, and then helping them fall in love themselves and continue this cycle is obviously pleasing to Benten. Shizue reminds us that these connections and cycles are literally what Benten is. Fortunes are not simply divine beings who happen to like/favor certain concepts – Benten literally is the connectons and cycles formed by and of romantic love, and therefore favors anything which strengthens those connections and cycles.

Shizue writes at length of the ways in which those connections and cycles don’t necessarily require a love to be consummated. For example, someone who denies their soulmate in order to enter an arranged marriage as instructed by their family, despairing at never being with the one they truly love… that person is keeping romantic love at the forefront of their thoughts and thus is likely to be rewarded by Benten with prosperity in the marriage their family has chosen for them. The heartbreak is the price they are paying for Benten’s favor.

Benten’s curse is therefore earned, not by any particular choice of romantic partners, but by rejecting the idea that one should care about romance at all. The kind of person who believes that love and romance are silly things disregarded by practical adults – that is the person who will earn Benten’s wrath and bring ruin to themselves and their family.

Shizue gives several example vows, including the vows she herself swore to Benten on her pilgrimage which later brought about her redemption and vindication for herself and her family.

Another in-universe work of literature which explains oaths to samurai is "Vengeance and Justice" by Matsu Hitomi.

Shortly before her gempukku, Matsu Hitomi watched her brother die in a duel against Matsu Akimori, a member of a rival lineage. On the day of her gempukku she challenged Akimori to a duel. He initially refused, saying she was not yet a worthy opponent. In anger, Hitomi attacked him, and he easily defeated her, sparing her life with while urging her to return to face him once she was skilled enough to possibly be an even match.

Hitomi left on a warrior’s pilgrimage to train and swore vows to the two fortunes of vengeance:

→ Yozo is the fortune of legal vengeance, e.g. the sentence of a magistrate to someone convicted of a crime as their punishment. Yozo is sometimes said to be the fortune of penance, both voluntarily taken and forcibly inflicted.

→ Hofukushu is the fortune of personal vengeance, e.g. the burning need to take revenge on someone who has harmed your family.  Hofukushu is sometimes said to be the fortune of sacrificial revenge, favoring those who would throw aside all other goals in pursuit of vengeance.

Hitomi went on a warrior’s pilgrimage, training for years in self-imposed exile until she considered herself worthy to return home and face Akimori. She did so, and although Akimori had risen to such a high position that she had no standing to challenge him, he saw her and judged that she had become a worthy opponent and accepted her new challenge. Hitomi prevailed in her duel, though she almost died of her wounds afterwards. As he lay dying, Akimori thanked her for the greatest warrior’s challege of his life, saying he was glad to have spared her all those years ago, and was happy to see she had finally become a worthy opponent.

Many books and plays have been written about Hitomi, and it is a common name chosen at gempukku by women who already have some specific reason to seek revenge, especially against those who have wronged a brother. Notably, the currently daimyo of the Mirumoto family, Mirumoto Hitomi, chose that name for herself as part of a declaration of vengeance against Hida Yakamo, who killed her brother in a duel. Hitomi later cut off Yakamo’s hand before returning home to assume the role of daimyo for herself, which had been held her her in regency by her uncle Sukune.

Matsu Hitomi’s book is considered the foundational work for anyone contemplating a warrior’s pilgrimage. This book lists a number of vows which can be sworn by someone contemplating this kind of journey.

The above books contain a number of vows whose efficatiousness have been proven if they are followed. There are also guidance for creating your own vow, though this is generally considered something for experts to do, since you’ll end up doing more harm than good if you fail to understand what a fortune actually wants. (Consider the example above of a person who wins Benten’s favor by choosing heartbreak – if a devotee of Benten didn’t understand this and swore a vow to see all soulmates joined together in marriage, then they’d probably do more harm than good.)  I will now describe some example vows, just to explain the concepts.

A "vow of devotion" is one of the most common vows, this can be sworn to any fortune, though the wording often differs based on the fortune involved. Because this vow requires you to orient your life and priorities around this fortune until death, it’s most commonly sworn by monks and priests who lead monastic lives.

Some non-monastic examples:

→ A vow of devotion sworn to Bishamon (the fortune of strength) is something a duelist might swear, requiring them to devote their entire life to bettering their skill in single combat. Any other responsibilities would come second, and all other pursuits would need to be judged in terms of how they further this goal. For example, someone swearing this vow might raise their Tact skill, but only to help ensure they are not manipulated out of being able to duel a worthy opponent. Someone holding a government post who has sworn this vow might be required to delegate far more of their responsibilities than they otherwise would. This devotion would be rewarded by increased strength and success in combat.

→ A vow of devotion sworn to Benten (the fortune of romantic love) is something a matchmaker might swear, requiring them to be looking at all times for favorable matches among all of the unmarried people they know, even those who have not actively sought this help. This usually requires discovering all that you can about those people you wish to match, forcing you into being a busybody, and those who swear this vow are often condemned as gossips and meddlers. This devotion will be rewarded by wisdom into the nature of love and proper matches, especially for the family of the person who swore the vow.

→ A vow of devotion sworn to Yozo (the fortune of legal vengeance) is something a magistrate might swear, requiring them to always enact the proper punishment for each crime, regardless of all other considerations. This will frequently involve offending powerful families and interests, and those who swear this vow will often find their careers derailed by the schemes and plotting of those who resent justice being imposed on them. This devotion will be rewarded by being given the insight to separate truth from falsehood and thus have the information necessary to be capable of imposing just retribution.

Another example vow is the "vow of poverty".  Members of ascetic monastic orders are required to swear this vow, and that’s the most common reason. However, there are several different forms of this vow, based on what exactly you are giving up, where you are directing the resources which would have otherwise been your personal property, and the purpose of the vow. Here are some non-monastic examples:

→ Witch Hunters swear a version of this vow used by those who hold public office. (Witch Hunters swear specifically to Hofukushu, but officials who swear this vow for any other office invariably choose a different fortune.) All gifts you accept are accepted on behalf of your office, and when you leave your office, the gifts stay with the office, along with all monies and resources you have accumulated during your time there. You must immediately find another position after leaving any current position, and failing that must join a monastery and have that take the place of your government post. This poverty is rewarded by increased trust in the office you hold and success in your official endeavors.

→ Some pilgrims and ronin and those who live in exile choose to eschew material things, swearing a vow of poverty to a fortune whose favor they wish to solicit. You may have no more than 1 koku in money, no more than 1 of any item or article of clothing, and no more possessions than you can carry. Anything in excess of this must be immediately discarded (not gifted!), e.g. if someone gives you a second hat as a gift, then immediately upon accepting it, you must thank your previous hat for its service to you and then throw it on the ground and leave it behind. This poverty is rewarded by success in your travels, and those who abide by these rules will find themsevles able to find success without worrying about their material needs being met despite an inability to meet those needs with their own resources.

→ When someone is devoted to a personal, family, and/or political cause which they cannot directly work towards (usually due to being away from home), they might swear a vow of poverty to whichever fortune most aligns with that cause, sending all of what they earn to support that cause. All possessions of value must be sold or donated to the cause, they must live in government housing or stay in flophouses (or as guests of friends/allies who support them), and all income beyond what is needed for survival and the execution of their duties must go to support this cause. This poverty is rewarded by directing the favor of the fortune to that cause, and also in empowering the one who swore it with the skill and ability to ensure success in similar causes in their own life.

Another interesting vow is the "vow of soothsaying".  While the word “soothsaying” is commonly used to refer to predicting the future, the literal meaning of the word is “truth-speaking”. This vow can be theoretically sworn to any fortune, and one would choose the fortune whose affairs are most relevant to the reasons why you’d feel led to swear this vow. Note that while the vow may be intended to cover a specific area, all versions of this vow require truth-speaking at all times, so anyone who swears any version of this vow to any fortune may never tell any lie for any reason.

Unlike the above vows, this is less likely to be sworn by monks, since monks rarely have much cause to lie or dissemble. And there’s little point in swearing a vow to do something you’d have no reason not to do anyway.

Some examples:

→ Ritsu the pilgrim is one who has been blessed by Benten with the ability to look at a person and sketch a drawing of their soulmate.  He swore the vow of soothsaying to Benten, because people are often upset at discovering the identity of their soulmate. Over the past few years, 3 different people have received sketches of gaijin soulmates. While this is promising news for Moto Gaheris’ military campaign (Toranosuke the abbot of Chai Sedo has declared that this portends success), it’s bad news for those receiving the sketches. By vowing to always convey truth to all who seek it, Ritsu is rewarded by receiving divine truth from Benten in return, and thus finds success in the performance of his holy works.

→ A healer might swear the vow of soothsaying to Jurojin (the fortune of longevity), vowing to only speak the truth when asked their opinion. This can be unpleasant when delivering bad news, but is especially awkward when rendering a healer unable to pass off guesses as facts. Hearing “I don’t know what’s wrong and have no idea if this medicine will help” is not reassuring and will often cause patients to seek help elsewhere, even from those who would decieve them by claiming certainty where none exists. This truth-speaking would be rewarded by helping the healer actually find truth, making them more able to diagnose maladies and afflictions.

→ A merchant might swear the vow of soothsaying to Daikoku (the fortune of wealth), vowing honesty in all business dealings. This can make negotiations considerably harder – while this vow does not require you to volunteer all information, anyone who knows you have sworn this vow can ask you questions, and refusing to answer is often as good as answering. This truth-speaking is rewarded by preventing you from being cheated, and bringing ruin to those who would use dishonest tactics to oppose your business endeavors.

One thing to note about the vow of soothsaying is that it doesn't require "honesty" per se.  You may not tell a direct lie, but it is permitted within the framework of the vow to make statements which are technically true but which intentionally deceive the listener into forming beliefs which are false.

This is also true for other vows - there can be "loopholes" in the vows, whether based on the wording of the vow or more generally the fortune's understanding of the vow.  In all cases the one whose judgment determines whether the vow has been broken is the fortune, not the person who has sworn it.

The above examples are all lifetime vows. However, someone can swear a vow to perform an individual task or service. Such vows can be completed, at which point you are under no further obligation to the fortune. Any favor gained will be kept, though no further favor is accrued, and there is no risk of angering the fortune due to noncompliance. The main risk is in dying without completing the task – the general consensus is that one who dies attempting to complete the task will gain the fortune’s favor, while one who dies having failed to put in sufficient effort will bring this failure with them into Jigoku and suffer the negative kharma and wrath of the fortune into future lives.

It’s dangerous to swear more than one limited vow at a time, unless the vows in no way impair one abother. If one vow requires mainly a financial obligation, and another vow requires time to be spent in some way, then that doesn’t necessarily conflict. However, even in that case someone might theoretically need to choose between e.g. pursuring a business opportunity and spending their time on their second vow, which could set up a lose-lose situation. On the other hand, keeping these tensions in mind at all times will win you even more favor for the fortunes.

Some examples of limited vows:

→ Instead of swearing a vow of devotion to Bishamon (the fortune of strength), one might swear a vow of pilgrimage, requiring them to go on a defined number of pilgrimages and/or visit a certain number of sites at which to train, e.g. training at at least one dojo in every clan in the Empire. Someone who swears this vow and begins planning for how to accomplish such a pilgrimage will be rewarded by beginning to accrue Bishamon’s favor prior to actually making the pilgrimage. In this way, swearing a vow is like borrowing against future earnings to recieve benefits early.

→ Someone might swear a vow of offering to a particular fortune, swearing to eventually make donations whose total is far in excess of what they have at the moment. For example, someone might swear to donate 1000 koku despite only having a stipend of ~50 koku/year. This would be rewarded by accumulating much of the favor that they’d eventually get up-front as well as being more likely to receive the kind of good fortune that makes them able to fulfill the obligation of their vow. The risk is that if they die or are otherwise rendered unable to ever meet the total, then they will be judged harshly if they could have been more generous with the percentage of their wealth.

→ Building a shrine or temple to a fortune is a great non-vow way to earn their favor, but someone unable to do so might swear a vow of creation, obligating them to see that a shrine is constructed as soon as they are able. This will be rewarded with the success that enables the person to build such a shrine, and punished if they fail to live up to their obligation.

→ Someone slighted in a particular way might swear a vow of revenge. This would often be sworn to Hofukushu (the elder fortune of vengeance), but depending on the nature of the offense and the nature of the intended vengeance this may be sworn to a different fortune instead. This obligates someone to focus their entire life on achieving vengeance until this has been accomplished. This will be rewarded by helping ensure that you have your revenge.

Here are some other example vows with a bit less detail, since you can probably discern the general pattern of what is expected and what rewards one can expect from each.

→ The vow of pacifism prevents one from ever offering violence, even in self-defense. This is most commonly sworn by monks, peasants, and samurai who have retired. The vow of non-killing is a more moderate alternative, though in some ways is riskier since any act of violence might potentially end with someone’s death, thus causing the vow to be broken.

→ A vow of prayer specifies the times, days, and manner which one must spend in prayer to a chosen fortune. This is typically very frequent, e.g. “every night at sundown”, and will usually interfere with other activities, since one might need to make frequent excuses at social gatherings to go pray. However, to some extent this inconvenience is the point, since it forces you to pay attention to your vow and orient your life and schedulearound it, which is what wins the favor of the fortune.

→ A vow of fasting is similar to the vow of prayer, specifing instead the duration and manner of fasting. This can be either a limited vow (specifying e.g. a total number of days on which someone will fast) or a permanent one (specifying a schedule of fasting one must adhere to for the rest of their life). In some cases the food that would otherwise be eaten is offered instead to the fortune – this is most common with the limited form of the vow.

→ A vow of matchmaking is a more specific version of the vow of devotion to Benton listed above. A favorable marriage is defined in many ways, such as producing many children, bringing families together, eliminating conflict, generating prosperity, etc. A matchmaker might generally try to balance all of these aspects… or they could devote themselves to one particular aspect and eschew all other considerations. For example, a matchmaker might swear to only recommend marriages where the strength of romantic love will be the strongest regardless of all other considerations, or only recommend marriages in which the families being joined together are sufficiently compatible that there will be the least amount of conflict between spouses and their parents.

→ A vow of atonement is sworn by someone who has committed some offence for which they seek redemption. This can either be a limited vow (obligating one to a particular outcome) or a permanent vow (signing one up for a lifetime of obligation). This is usually sworn to either a fortune one has offended or a fortune whose affairs are most relevant to the offense someone has made against another person.

→ The vow of deathseeking is sworn by Lion clan samurai to Emma-O (the fortune of death) as an alternative to the vow of atonement. Someone so disgrased that their only other option would be execution or seppuku might swear this vow, intending to throw themselves into dangerous situations benefiting their daimyo as a way to atone. In wartime deathseekers usually congregate into Deathseeker platoons (or sometimes even larger units), where they go into extremely dangerous battles. Samurai who swear this vow are said to usually find death within a year.

→ The vow of judgment is most commonly sworn to Yozo (the fortune of legal vengeance), but often sworn to some other fortune whose affairs are relevant to the vower’s area of responsibility. In some ways this is an even more extreme vow than the one sworn by deathseekers, because it requires one to do everything possible to bring about the outcome they consider to be just, regardless of any other factors. For example, someone who has sworn this vow to Yozo might find themselves obligated to carry out an execution even if overruled and the sentence commuted by a higher authority. Or if a magistrate believed someone to be innocent, they would be obligated to take up arms against their own family if necessary to secure a prisoner’s release and escape.

Note that the specifics of each vow are tied to the fortune being honored, the individual's situation or role, and the type of commitment they're willing to make, be it limited or permanent. This provides a depth of customization and personal commitment that makes each vow unique and meaningful.

Here are some miscellaneous vows for which I have not written extensive explanations:

→ The vow of obedience sworn by acolytes of a religious order.

→ The vow of celibacy sworn by members of some ascetic orders.

→ The vow of silence which some monks take to prohibit themselves from speaking, sometimes with well-specified exceptions such as certain holy days.

→ The vow of bloodlessness which prohibits the eating of “anything that bleeds”, i.e. adopting a vegetarian diet.

→ The vow of isolation in which some holy men practice self-imprisonment. Criminals sentenced to spend the rest of their lives in prison monasteries are sometimes forced to swear this vow under penalty of death.

→ The vow of charity was recently popularized by the prophet Grand Abbot Okawa which sometimes supplements and other times replaces a vow of poverty, usually depending on whether it’s being sworn by a monk or samurai.

I know that some of what I've described is based on historical example, and some of it is invented for the fictional setting of Rokugan and does not match the historical concepts of vows.  When I ask you to help me generate vows in the future, I would like you to combine things which I have described here while still drawing on historical Japanese vows, such as those sworn in a Shinto or Buddhist religious order.

Before moving on, here is the high-level description of one of my campaigns:

Here is the vow of obedience sworn by all members of the Order of Bishamon swear in Lion lands (different clans often have different versions of these vows):

"I, [Monk’s Name], vow unto Bishamon, the embodiment of strength and defense, and to the Order that serves him. I submit myself wholly to the guidance and authority of the Abbot, and to the teachings and principles of our sacred Order.

I shall follow their wisdom with humility and dedication, understanding their insight to be born of a deeper connection to the cycles and interconnections of all things. In obedience, I strive to tread the path towards enlightenment, transcending the bonds of ignorance and suffering.

Under the gaze of Bishamon and the Fortunes, I pledge my loyalty and dedication to this sacred journey. I vow to uphold the strength and virtue of Bishamon, the eternal cycle of courage and strength, as I strive to align my spirit with his rhythm, becoming an active echo of his divine essence."

In addition to the above, the PCs have several different vows which they have the option to take.

One of them is a "vow of fasting" which has this wording:

"In the sight of all that is, and under the watchful gaze of Bishamon, the Fortune of Strength, I, [Name], swear a solemn vow of fasting. As the kumosaya blight has taken our rice and soybeans, so too shall I limit myself to these humble grains, a symbol of the suffering endured by our lands. I shall partake only of rice, soybeans, and the simplest of vegetables, abstaining from all other foods, as a testament to my solidarity with those who suffer. I shall drink only water and tea, pure and clear, renouncing all other beverages as a symbol of my commitment to clarity and purity in my purpose.

May my abstention serve as a constant reminder of the hardship faced by our people, strengthening my resolve to bring relief and rectification. May my sacrifices purify me and bring me closer to the strength and endurance embodied by Bishamon, so that I may better serve in the pursuit of our collective redemption.

In my daily meals, I shall remember the people, the land, and the divine grace that sustains us all. And in my strength, may I reflect the strength of Bishamon, using it not for personal gain, but for the betterment of all. This I swear, in the name of Bishamon, Fortune of Strength, and in the pursuit of the rectification of our great sin."

Another is a "vow of poverty", which has this wording:

"I, [Name], in the sight of the Celestial Heavens, the Kami, and the ever-vigilant Bishamon, do solemnly swear a vow of poverty.

I pledge to renounce all worldly possessions and personal wealth, to relinquish the desire for material gain, and to live a life of simplicity and humility. I commit myself to depend solely on the generosity of others for my basic needs, and to accept their gifts with gratitude, while never seeking or expecting excess.

I promise to use any resources that come my way not for my own benefit, but to help those less fortunate, to alleviate suffering, and to further the harmony of the Empire. I vow to maintain a clear mind, free from the distractions of material desires, focused solely on the pursuit of enlightenment and the service of others.

In the spirit of Bishamon, I understand that true strength lies not in the accumulation of wealth, but in the resilience of the spirit, the endurance of the body, and the wisdom of the mind. The Way of the warrior, the path I have chosen, is one of discipline, self-denial, and service.

I acknowledge that, in breaking this vow, I would tarnish my spirit, invite the disfavor of the Heavens, and undermine the very principles I strive to uphold. I risk falling from Bishamon’s favor, and failing in the pursuit of the strength he embodies.

In choosing this path of self-denial, I aim to remind myself and others of the impermanence of earthly riches, the value of spiritual wealth, and the virtue of compassion. I endeavor to embody the strength of Bishamon, not through material prosperity, but through the strength of my character and the depth of my resolve.

So swear I, [Name], under the watchful eyes of Bishamon, the Fortune of Strength."

The third example vow for this campaign is the "vow of discovery", which has this wording:

"In the sight of Bishamon, the mighty Fortune of Strength and Warriors, I, [character’s name], vow to delve into the depths of truth regarding the calamity that has befallen these lands.

I swear to guard the secrets entrusted to me, as the armor of Bishamon shields the righteous, valuing the truth above all else, and preserving the confidentiality of those who demand it as a condition of sharing their truths with me. Yet, in my pursuit of truth, I will not speak falsehoods, nor will I allow deception to cloud the purity of my quest. When asked, I will speak truth or silence, never lies.

I commit to not publicly accuse any soul of any sin without proof, for the blade of Bishamon does not strike without certainty. I understand that a hasty accusation may cause harm as grievous as the blight itself.

Guided by Bishamon’s strength, I will navigate the path of truth, the path of wisdom, and the path of honor. May my journey bring clarity and, ultimately, healing to this land we all hold dear. This I vow, in Bishamon’s name."

Note that, all three of these vows are sworn to Bishamon, but Daikoku, the Fortune of Wealth, would be a more intuitive choice for a vow of poverty. After all, to renounce material wealth is to engage directly with the domain that Daikoku oversees.

However, the religious and spiritual core of this vow is not about wealth or lack of it, but about the strength of character and spirit. This vow is a test of endurance and resilience, and a commitment to a path of self-denial and discipline. These qualities align with the teachings and principles of Bishamon, the Fortune of Strength, more so than those of Daikoku.

When one swears a vow of poverty to Bishamon, one is not merely giving up wealth. One is also vowing to endure hardship, to cultivate inner strength, and to seek the wisdom that comes from overcoming material desires. This mirrors the path of the warrior, who must be strong not only in body, but also in spirit and mind.

The rewards expected from such a vow to Bishamon would be those associated with personal growth and spiritual strength: resilience in the face of adversity, wisdom gained from simplicity, and a deep sense of inner peace and fulfillment that comes from living in alignment with one’s principles.

Swearing a vow of poverty to Daikoku, on the other hand, would have a different focus. Daikoku governs over wealth and prosperity, so renouncing wealth in his name could potentially lead to a deeper understanding of the true nature of wealth, its impermanence, and the liberation that comes from letting it go. The rewards from such a vow might be more tied to the cultivation of generosity, gratitude, and contentment.

One thing worth highlighting here are the risks of monks swearing vows which they have not sufficiently prepared for, which is a theme I mentioned earlier.

As an example, consider the "vow of discovery" above.  Someone might reasonably ask a monk tasked with the role of karmic inquisitor, "Why have you not sworn a vow of discovery?  You seek to uncover the source of the kumosaya, so why have you not sworn such vows to seek Bishamon's aid?"

And a monk might reply, "Such a vow comes with a high demand for precision, and I lack the specific training to be confident in my ability to perfectly execute that vow.  For example, suppose that someone asked me how long I had been investigating these matters, and I answered that it had been 5 weeks, but in fact I had miscounted and it had actually been 6 weeks.  I would be speaking a falsehood, which would break my vow, anger Bishamon, and ultimately make it harder rather than easier for me to uncover the truths behind the kumosaya blight."

This is an important running theme about oaths and vows in the world of Rokugan.

For additional vow examples, there was a Kitsuki magistrate named Tetsu from the Dragon clan who wanted to help the Moto conquor the city of Medin al Salaat.  To this end, he swore several vows to various fortunes.  His vow of devotion was to Saibankan, the fortune of magistrates and judges.  He also swore vows to Kamoku, is the fortune of the west wind, i.e. the wind that comes from the west and blows towards the east, and Jokuju, the fortune of the east wind.

I'll start by giving information about Saibankan.

Yozo is the younger fortune of vengeance and is described specifically as the fortune of legal retribution, the kind that would be imposed by a judge or magistrate.  Yet there is also Saibankan, who is separately the fortune who guides judges and magistrates towards imposing that legal retribution.  Some might ask about the difference, and in particular, what distinguishes a vow of devotion to one from the other.

In life, Saibankan helped create the common law legal system of Rokugan, in which precedents from previous rulings of judges and magistrates are just as important as the written laws themselves.  After Saibankan’s death the Emperor named him the fortune of justice, though records are unclear about which type of fortune-naming occurred - whether the Emperor elevated him or recognized that he had naturally ascended to fortunehood.

Many fear the ability of cunning people to evade punishment through trickery and cleverly twisting the law to suit them by exploiting loopholes.  The Moto famously keep their laws secret for this reason, and avoid setting binding precedents in their rulings.  However, Saibankan viewed this possibility as a mark in favor of common law!  Rather than an unintended consequence, letting someone know in advance whether their actions would bring legal retribution was actually the point for Saibankan.

Saibankan often told fables during interrogations and when giving rulings.  When letting someone go unpunished he always explained what aspect of their behavior had saved them, and when issuing a harsh punishment he’d often explain what minor change in behavior would have spared them.  This was not only for the benefit of the accused, but to serve as examples to others - society benefits from everyone knowing exactly what lines they may and may not cross, especially when seeking revenge or otherwise trying to harm an enemy.

Thus, while Yozo is sometimes described as the fortune of retributive justice who manifests after a judgment has been issued, Saibankan is sometimes described as the fortune of preventative justice.  Saibankan tempers the actions of those who might otherwise step over the line into criminality, and he provides measured responses to crimes that help judges and magistrates restore balance to society to prevent further retribution and escalation and wrongdoing.

The oath of office for various magistrate positions already sets high standards of devotion to the law and principles of justice.  These oaths usually require officeholders to swear to things like “uphold the law without being affected by fear, mercy, love, or hatred”.  Some people who intend to become magistrates swear a vow of devotion to Saibankan with the same terms - the main difference is that while one is released from an oath of office when leaving a post, a vow of devotion stays with someone for the rest of their life.  The other difference is that a magistrate might only be oathbound in their official acts, whereas the vow of devotion requires that same commitment in every aspect of a person’s life.

Toranosuke, the abbot who advised Tetsu on his vows, notes that the main danger to Tetsu from swearing such a vow is that he might find himself in situations where his other obligations pull him away from making and enforcing fair decisions.  In particular, he cautions Tetsu that Prince Fukuhachi (one of the Emperor's younger children) might wish a particular outcome because, given the parties involved, that ruling most heavily contributes to the functioning of a well-ordered society… even if the particulars of a case don’t support that ruling on the merits of the immediate case at hand.  Tetsu might then find himself tested by being put into impossible situations where his loyalties demand actions which his vow may not permit.  However, Tetsu would find himself rewarded with clarity of insight into disputes he finds himself involved with, as well as finding himself more highly regarded and trusted… though this might never be enough reward to make up for it if he finds himself crossing the Prince!

With this in mind, Tetsu ended up swearing this vow:

"I, Kitsuki Tetsu, in reverence to Saibankan, the fortune of justice and guiding hand of magistrates, do solemnly vow to uphold the principles of fairness and balance in all aspects of my life. I pledge to serve as a beacon of preventative justice, tempering actions and providing measured responses, regardless of personal sentiments and societal pressures.

I promise to embody the wisdom of Saibankan, to act as a guidepost for others, making clear the lines between right and wrong, promoting understanding over ignorance. In my actions, may the will of Saibankan be echoed, teaching others of the consequences and rewards of their deeds.

I recognize the trials that this path will bring, the loyalties it may test, and the conflicts it may stir. Yet, I embrace these challenges, understanding that the clarity of insight and the trust earned will guide me towards the path of true justice.

May my every decision, whether in official capacity or private conduct, reflect the principles that Saibankan holds dear. In times of adversity, may the spirit of Saibankan guide me, allowing me to discern truth from deceit, justice from vengeance.

So swear I, Kitsuki Tetsu."

Let's move on to Tetsu's other 2 vows.

The Empire was formed in what is now Otosan Uchi, along the eastern ocean shore.  This is significant in the context of the winds, because civilization was spread from east to west.

Kamoku is the mildest of the four winds - after all, her west-to-east force did not resist the spread of the Empire as the Great Ancestors brought their armies to overcome the barbaric warlords who opposed them.  Instead, she provided opportunity and the potential for greatness. Many warlords swore fealty to the Great Ancestors after losing to them on the field of battle - Kamoku therefore brings potential which must be fought for in order to reap the benefits.  Farmers similarly pray to Kamoku for an early spring, which gives them the opportunity to put in the hard work necessary for a more prosperous harvest.

Jikoju meanwhile symbolizes the opportunity of knowledge, wisdom, and a just society.  Farmers were freed from the tyranny of their local warlords, and sailors lost at sea rely on the east wind to return them home to civilization.  The east wind also symbolizes adventure and mystery - those who leave home to travel to new places often pray to Jokuju that their travels will take them to places where justice prevails and the Way prospers.

Toranosuke recommends that Tetsu consider a vow to each of these winds rather than choosing one or the other.  Tetsu lives in a geographic location which is literally a gateway between east and west, and his position requires him to stand with one foot in each world.  On behalf of Komoku, he will provide opportunity to the Empire from the west, bringing conflict with it which must be overcome for those gains to be realized.  On behalf of Jikoju, he will provide civilization and knowledge from the east, offering the Moto wisdom they lack that they will need to succeed and prosper.

Toranosuke strongly recommends against making vows of devotion to more than one fortune - that is only ever done in Lion lands, and all other clans regard this as unwise by undermining the devotion being attempted through dividing your attention and loyalties.  Instead he recommends that Tetsu swear the following:

1) A vow of creation to Jikoju to build and staff a temple to him in Medin al Salaat.  This would symbolize bringing the gift of civilization to the city, much as the Great Ancestors did to the pre-Imperial warlords.  The danger in this vow is that if Moto Gaheris' military campaign fails, Tetsu will still be bound to either ensure this temple is created or die trying.  Dying with a vow unfulfilled brings negative karma to your soul and the wrath of the fortune into your next lives, though a death caused by attempting to fulfill a vow brings good karma and the favor of the fortune.  

If Tetsu swore this vow, he would need to remember those stakes at all times, and be mentally preparing himself for the worst.  For example, he might plan that if the city is not conquered then he will abandon his current life and become a pilgrim so that he can journey to Medin al Salaat and attempt to build a temple there as a foreign monk.  Because he will be from the Empire which recently tried to conquer the city, he might find himself unwelcome and may even be killed for his trouble.  Keeping that possibility in mind every day will enhance his reward from Jikoju, assisting him in bringing civilization and success to the Moto in their endeavors.

Toranosuke also recommends committing to swearing a vow of prayer once the temple has been constructed.  Those who build temples will sometimes take a piece of the temple with them so that once per day they can say a prayer as if in the temple they built - this was especially common in the early days of the empire when new temples were introducing new people to a fortune, so this would be especially appropriate and effective here.

2) A vow of fasting to Kamoku.  While there are many possible parameters of this vow, Toranosuke recommends the variant where you may not eat or drink anything at night, as defined by the time between sunset and sunrise.  Though this was not mentioned in the books on vows that Tetsu read, Toranosuke happens to know that this particular vow of fasting is recognized as particularly efficacious when sworn to Kamoku.  Because of Kamoku’s relationship with Lady Sun, it pleases her when her devotees only consume food and drink in the daytime.  (The wording of this particular version of the vow literally includes the phrase “can see daylight”, so technically Tetsu also wouldn’t be able to eat or drink while deep in a cave or mine.)  Tetsu’s reward would be finding himself presented with opportune challenges from the west which are within his ability to overcome (or die trying), resulting in prosperity for himself and those he serves.

Toranosuke recommends this combination of 3 vows because of how it orients Tetsu.  It makes Tetsu the bridge between the east and west, mediating the line between civilization and barbarism, and seeking out conflict in order to bring order and prosperity to all who deserve it.  Tetsu will accomplish this through his devotion to justice by embodying and enforcing the principles of Rokugani law and custom.

Here is the wording of the vow of creation that Tetsu swore to Jikoju:

"I, Kitsuki Tetsu, in honor of Jikoju, the fortune of the East Wind and purveyor of wisdom and justice, do pledge to foster the seeds of enlightenment and civilization within the city of Medin al Salaat.

I vow to construct and nurture a temple in your honor, a beacon of knowledge amidst the wilderness, a testament to the boundless opportunities that spring from wisdom and justice. This temple shall stand as a symbol of your might, Jikoju, a place where the spirits of wisdom can dance on the eastern winds, inspiring and guiding those who seek enlightenment.

I understand the weight of this commitment, the challenges it may bring, and the sacrifices it may demand. Yet, I embrace these, knowing the importance of this task and the good it can bring to the world. May my every step forward be a testament to my dedication to this vow.

Should the waves of fate crash against me, I am ready to become a pilgrim, journeying to the ends of the Earth, risking all, even my life, to fulfill this promise. I shall carry with me a part of the temple, ensuring that each day, wherever I am, I can offer my prayers to you, Jikoju, as if within the sacred walls of the temple I vowed to build.

So swear I, Kitsuki Tetsu."

Finally, here is the wording for the vow of fasting that Tetsu swore to Kamoku:

"I, Kitsuki Tetsu, in homage to Kamoku, the fortune of the West Wind, the bringer of challenges and opportunities, do pledge to honor you in a manner befitting your reverence for Lady Sun.

I vow to fast each day from the setting of the sun until its rise, abstaining from food and drink in the hours of darkness. As a symbol of my dedication, I will only partake sustenance when I can see daylight, honoring the journey of the sun, the journey of life, and your gentle but formidable force.

In doing so, I open myself to the challenges you bring, to the opportunities hidden within. I embrace these tests, knowing they are stepping stones towards the prosperity and growth that can be achieved by overcoming adversity. May I seize these opportunities and, in doing so, honor you.

In the times of darkness, in the challenges of life, may your guiding winds of the west steer me towards success, not shying away from conflict but facing it with the resolve to emerge triumphant.

So swear I, Kitsuki Tetsu."

This set of vows is an important example because it demonstrates how vows can combine to define a path which is larger than the sum of its individual parts.  These three vows are specific, but the place in the world they create for Tetsu is more than what the wording of any single one of these vows.

Here's another example of a vow.  Akodo no Sugiwara Natsuki was interested in swearing a vow to Koshin, the fortune of roads.  Natsuki was interested in gaining more favor from this fortune, due to his new position as the Moto Minister of Works.

Here are some miscellaneous facts about the Empire’s roads:

→ In the first few centuries of the Empire, most roads were local and connected domain capitals to their holdings in the provinces.

→ In the 3rd century, the Emperor Hantei the 10th launched the most massive public works project in history, ultimately constructing over 50,000 miles of Imperial roads, and mandating by Imperial decree that those who traveled along those roads may not be taxed by local daimyo.

→ In addition to the roads themselves, the Emperor mandated waystations. In many places a waystation exists once per mile along the roads, to protect against bandits and ensure safe passage for travelers.

→ The Emperor spends well over a million koku per year on road upkeep, construction, and waystation staffing.

→ Koshin was already a minor fortune who had previously been prayed to during local road construction projects. He rose to prominence, especially in Crane lands, whose merchant caravans could now travel the Empire as never before. (Remember that the Yasuki were still part of the Crane at this time.)

→ The Unicorn clan favored Koshin even more than the Crane clan, as the Ki Rin Trail had begun to bring them great prosperity. Although the Ki Rin Trail was never a formal road system, the Unicorn clan established the same sorts of waystations for hundreds of miles to the east and west of Medin al Salaat to allow merchants to bring them wealth and prosperity. (It’s unclear whether the temple to Koshin that the Unicorn built in Medin al Salaat is still operating.)

→ Koshin is therefore not just the fortune of physical roads, but of orderly systems of travel.

→ Intuitively, one might expect that Koshin is most closely related to Natsu-togumara, the fortune of travel. However, in fact Koshin is said to sit at the right hand of Daikoku, the fortune of wealth, because roads bring wealth, and wealth enables the construction of roads.

→ A sect of the Order of Koshin which originated in Hiruma lands is the Order of the Barefoot Brethren. Originally centered in Hiruma Castle, the order moved to Kyuden Kaiu after the Maw destroyed most of Hiruma lands. Its members frequently walk the roads of the Empire so much (usually carrying messages) that they wear through the soles of their shoes, arriving barefoot at their destinations. Some Miya heralds make a point of walking by foot, sometimes barefoot.

→ When the system of roads was being constructed in the Empire, people would often swear vows of creation to Koshin, swearing that they will create a certain amount of road or construct a certain number of waystations. Natsuki might consider this, but when it comes to staffing the Ki Rin Trail waystations, he could end up in the same position as Tetsu, where if Gaheris’ military efforts fail then he is obligated to fulfill his vow regardless at great expense and risk. (On the other hand, he is more likely to experience success in his endeavors and even make Gaheris’ military success more likely if he swore this vow!)

With all of this in mind, Natsuki visited a disused waystation in the desert - the Eyes Over the Desert Wells.  He decided to swear a vow of creation, that he would return and establish a new waystation on this site.  Here is the wording of the vow that he swore:

"I, Akodo no Sugiwara Natsuki, stand humbled before Koshin, God of Roads and Waystations, the unfailing guide of all travelers. I stand at the brink of the Eyes Over the Desert Wells, a beacon of the past now lost to time and sand.

In your name, Koshin, I swear a vow of creation. I pledge to resurrect this waystation, to breathe life into its quiet halls and to make it once again a haven for those who journey the vast desert. I will lay the stones, raise the walls, and light the beacon that will stand as a testament of your influence and our devotion to your ways.

Under your watchful gaze, I promise to restore this place, not only to serve the weary travelers but also to honor the interconnectedness you represent. In bringing back the Eyes Over the Desert Wells, I seek to strengthen the ties that bind the Empire, to facilitate the free flow of trade, ideas, and prosperity that are the lifeblood of our people.

I understand the gravity of this vow and accept the responsibility it places upon my shoulders. I stand ready to face the trials and challenges that lie ahead. Even if the winds of fortune do not favor our efforts, I swear to carry out this task, even at great expense and risk, for my word is my bond, and my resolve is unyielding.

So swear I, Akodo no Sugiwara Natsuki."

For another example of a vow, let's return to the concept of a warrior's pilgrimage.  Kuni Isamu wanted to go on such a pilgrimage, and beforehand decided to swear a vow to Bishamon about the pilgrimage he was about to undertake.  However, Isamu is not educated in these matters and so he consulted with a wise priestess to advise him.  The priestess suggested several possible vows, and Isamu felt drawn to a vow of silence.  He couldn't explain why he was drawn to this vow, which he took as a sign that Bishamon was directing him towards this vow in particular, for reasons which Isamu was not capable of comprehending.

However, he was concerned about the vow interfering with his higher duties as a Witch Hunter.  With that being said, he didn't want to "water down" his vow to the point where it didn't really bind him.  Instead, he merely wanted some framework for an extremely limited exemption, for example perhaps only in situations where it would save a human life or capture a maho-tsukai.  The wise priestess with whom he consulted offered him the following wording for his vow:

"In the sight of Bishamon, Patron of Warriors and the Fortune of Strength, I, Kuni Isamu, vow to uphold a pledge of silence. I recognize this vow as an act of discipline and sacrifice, a testament to my internal focus and commitment to the path of the warrior.

Until the end of this year, I promise to speak only when necessity dictates, and even then, to use the least words needed. This exception is confined strictly to circumstances wherein human lives are at risk or when the capture of a maho-tsukai is within reach, reflecting my duty as a Witch Hunter.

Let my silence be a conduit of Bishamon's strength, a testament to my devotion and my commitment to the path I walk. May my actions serve as my voice, my commitment to justice and the protection of Rokugan speak louder than words.

May Bishamon guide my path and give me the strength to uphold this vow. This I swear."

In some cases I'd like for vows to tie strongly into the personal history of the human who "became" a fortune.  (In Rokugan, a fortune would have existed before the life of that human, but the human merged with the fortune or joined it or became part of it.)

For example, here's some information about Soshi Saibankan.

Saibankan is the fortune of magistrates and judges. It’s unclear in the historical record whether he naturally ascended into becoming one with the existing fortune of magistrates and judges upon his death or if the Emperor elevated him into becoming a fortune upon his death. Either way, he was recognized throughout the Empire as a wise and judicious magistrate, and the system of Imperial magistrates which persists to this day is sometimes called “Saibankan’s net”.

In the second century, at the behest of the Emperor and his Emerald Champion Doji Hatsuo, Soshi Saibankan wrote the Emerald Charter, which defines the duties and privileges of all Emerald Magistrates everywhere. Saibankan also advised the Emperor to establish the common law system that exists to this day, in which precedents from previous rulings would be used to create expectations about future cases.

Saibankan did not come into public notice until he was 35, when he was appointed an obscure judgeship (“Executor of the Northern Fields”) in Otosan Uchi. When he accepted this job, he found out that there was a long-standing dispute between a Yasuki samurai merchant family and Otomo Yorishi, the Emperor’s favorite nephew. Yorishi had paid a sizable sum of money to purchase a large orchard to the north of Otosan Uchi, but it turned out that the man he paid was a con artist who had no claim to the land. Yorishi asserted ownership over the land anyway, claiming that its Yasuki owners had been swindled and if this man was selling their land without their knowledge, it was they who needed to track him down and demand recompense rather than him.

While it was obvious that the Yasuki claim was the just one, no previous judge had been foolish enough to irritate the Emperor’s favorite nephew. However, Saibankan took up the case and immediately settled it on its merits. The Emperor, who had been previously unaware of the entire dispute, was so impressed that he took the unusual action of promoting Saibankan over hundreds of other candidates to chief magistrate of the Inner City, bypassing the usual procedure of asking the Imperial Chancellary for a recommendation.

Saibankan was famous for telling fables prior to making his rulings. The Emperor once visited his court in disguise to hear him pass judgment and described his ruling as being “like hearing a wise old monk give a sermon”. He would specifically take cases which he found useful for giving instruction on principles of justice in his rulings, and he would invite his subordinate magistrates to see him work, to better instruct them on how to hand out rulings.

One famous example is “the case of the stolen smell”. A paranoid innkeeper learned that a poor student was sitting in the alley next to his kitchen. The student ate his bland foods while inhaling the scents wafting out of the inn’s kitchen, thus “flavoring” his meals.

Although his colleagues advised Saibankan to throw the case out as ridiculous, he decided to hear it, because despite its ridiculous nature there were a number of interesting considerations involved, such as when and under what circumstances an owner of property may demand a fee from someone who knowingly came to that property.

Saibankan declared that he was ruling in favor of the innkeeper, and in so doing set some important precedents about land use and alley rights which persist to this day. He then proceeded to ask the student whether he had any money in his purse. When the student answered yes, he instructed the student to shake the purse in order to jingle the coins within. He then declared that the sound of the student’s money was appropriate payment for the smell of the innkeeper’s food.

Note how "the case of the stolen smell" is lifted from a story about the real person of Ōoka Tadasuke in Edo-period Japan.  Although Rokugan is not Japan, it's useful to be able to incorporate real Japanese stories (both historical and mythical) into the setting, both for vows and for the explanations that people give about why those vows exist and are structured the way they are.

Note that the current Minister of Justice for the Damasu domain has sworn this vow to Saibankan above and beyond the usual oath of office:

"In the sight of Saibankan, the Fortune of Magistrates and Judges, I, [name], humbly offer my deepest vow of unwavering devotion, in tandem with my oath of office as the Minister of Justice for the Damasu domain.

In my pursuit of truth and justice, I pledge to disregard all external influences and self-interest. I vow to deliver rightful punishment for every crime committed within the jurisdiction entrusted to me, irrespective of the offender's rank, position or family ties. No power, be it political or familial, shall sway my dedication to the course of true justice.

I devote myself to Saibankan's guiding principles, promising to adhere firmly to our law, undeterred by threats, inducements, or consequences. I recognize the heavy responsibility I bear and willingly accept the potential for resentment, schemes, and obstructions that may be devised against me by those who reject justice's impartial hand.

In return, I seek Saibankan's blessing, praying for the divine insight necessary to discern truth from falsehood, enabling me to dispense justice with wisdom and fairness. I dedicate my career, my honor, and my very life to the tireless pursuit of justice, undeterred by the challenges and sacrifices this path may entail.

Saibankan, whose net upholds the justice of the Empire, accept my vow. Bestow upon me the courage to stand steadfast in the face of adversity, the wisdom to judge fairly, and the strength to enforce the law without falter. My devotion is yours; I walk this path in your name and for the people of the Damasu domain."

As another example of someone swearing a vow which goes above and beyond his usual oath of office, the Damasu Minister of Works has sworn this vow:

"Before the gaze of Daikoku, Fortune of Wealth and Bounty, I, Akodo no Damasu Kishiro, humbly make my vow of unyielding devotion, an extension of my solemn oath as the Minister of Works for the Damasu domain.

In my service to the domain, I pledge to champion the wealth of our land, and strive for its prosperity, recognizing that the abundance or scarcity we face impacts every soul within our domain. I vow to steward our resources wisely and effectively, irrespective of personal gain, and to strive for the wealth of the Damasu domain above all else.

I dedicate myself to Daikoku's teachings, promising to nurture our land, foster its productivity, and maximize its prosperity. I realize the risk of envy, greed, and strife that may stem from those who covet the wealth I am pledged to protect and augment.

In return, I beseech Daikoku's grace, praying for the divine acumen to guide the domain towards prosperity. I dedicate my service, my honor, and my very existence to the ceaseless pursuit of wealth and prosperity for the Damasu domain, undeterred by the challenges and sacrifices this journey may demand.

Daikoku, Fortune of Wealth, I humbly seek your acceptance of my vow. Grant me the discernment to wisely manage our resources, the vision to see opportunities for growth, and the fortitude to stand firm against those who would threaten our prosperity. My devotion is yours; I chart this course in your name and for the prosperity of the people of Damasu."

And now, here's an example of what a vow of deathseeking typically looks like.  Note that deathseekers don't try to meaninglessly throw their lives away.  The goal is to "spend" your death in a way that benefits your clan and brings glory to your ancestors.  A deathseeker who simply breaks from their unit and in so doing undermines their army's chances of winning the battle has done the opposite.

With that being said, a platoon or company full of deathseekers is a fearsome and terrifying thing to encounter, since their morale will not break and they will fight to the last and will make it extremely difficult for the other side to withdraw even if both sides are wounded.  Thus, the vow cannot be that you WILL die, since this vow cannot require someone to throw their life away needlessly.  However, it can require you to "seek" death and to tactically and strategically focus on winning all battles and look for opportunities to spend your own life to win battles for your side.

All of this leads to the vow having this kind of form:

"I, (name), now stand before you, Emma-O, the Fortune of Death, and the spirits of my ancestors, bearing the weight of my disgrace and failure. I understand that the only path left for me to restore honor to my name and to my family is to seek death in the service of my daimyo and clan.

In this sacred moment, I make my vow. I shall embrace my fate, not with fear but with courage, seeking opportunities where my death may turn the tide of battle and bring victory to my clan. I pledge to find honor in each fight, in each encounter, and with every decision I make, always looking for the path that leads towards a noble end.

I vow that I will not squander my life needlessly. My death shall not be in vain, nor shall it weaken our cause. Instead, I shall be a beacon of resolve, an embodiment of Lion's spirit, that even in death, we fight on.

I acknowledge that I tread on the edge of a blade, that each step I take is one closer to my end. Yet, I walk this path willingly, embracing the role of a deathseeker, my purpose rooted in my duty and honor. I know my time may be short, yet I shall strive to make each moment count.

By the power of Emma-O, and the eyes of my ancestors, I make this vow. I seek death, not as an escape, but as a path to redemption. I shall not shy away from danger, but meet it head-on, with the strength of a Lion and the conviction of a samurai.

My name, once a symbol of disgrace, shall echo in the halls of our ancestors as a testament to my commitment and determination. The echoes of my deeds shall remind all of the price of honor, the strength of conviction, and the unyielding spirit of a true Lion samurai.

From this day forth, I am a Deathseeker. Until the day that I fall in battle, every breath I take shall be in service to my daimyo, my clan, and my honor. This is my vow, this is my path."

In my next campaign, the PCs are not only members of the Order of Bishamon, but also members of a secret society, the Order of Lord Moon.

Lord Moon is not evil per se, but is a terrifying figure because of his emphasis on individuals pursuing their own goals and ambitions regardless of cost or effect on others.  Lady Sun emphasizes harmony, while Lord Moon delights in conflict.  While the Empire contains both things, the fact that the world is more full of conflict than the Emperor might prefer means that those who pray frequently to Lord Moon tend to be looked upon with suspicion and distrust.

Here is the vow which members of The Order of Lord Moon swear upon their initiation:

"I, (NAME), swear to Lord Moon that I shall be a faithful member of his Order, and show loyalty to the brothers and sisters who share in its teachings and ways. I swear to always act in the best interests of our order and its members. I swear to keep secret the identities of my fellow members, and to protect their lives and wellbeing as if they were my own. I will use the knowledge and power gained from my membership in The Order of Lord Moon to pursue my personal goals and ambitions, but will never allow my actions to bring harm to our order or its members. I will devote myself fully to the service of Lord Moon and to the advancement of our order, and will remain steadfast in my loyalty to The Order of Lord Moon until the end of my days. So swear I, (NAME)."

This vow is shorter than most of the other vows we have covered, in part because it is an older vow which has been passed down for many centuries, and thus predates some of the common forms and conventions used in vows.

One of the responsibilities of the Damasu Ministry of Rites is cataloging the various signs which might portend disaster. There are known signs which foretell of floods, fires, plagues, and all manner of catastrophes which can be mitigated if the government is not caught unprepared.

Unfortunately, the fungal blight kumosaya caught the entire domain by surprise, when it destroyed over half of this year’s rice and soybean crop in the Damasu domain.

In their role as karmic inquisitors from the Order of Bishamon, the PCs have been tasked with uncovering the mystery of not only what kinds of sins might have prompted the blight, but also why these omens and portents did not forewarn the government.

There are specifically 7 signs which ought to have heralded this disaster:

1) A “pillar of cloud”: A strange and ominous cloud formation should have appeared in the sky over the province of Izumo, perhaps taking the shape of a pillar or tower. The cloud should have been visible from a great distance and persisted for an extended period of time, given the magnitude of the blight. The foretunetellers of Izumo were shocked at the fact that this did not happen prior to the blight.

2) Dead rats appearing in public places: Large numbers of dead rats should have started turning up in public areas, such as streets or markets. The rats would have appeared to have died without any apparent cause or be arranged in a peculiar pattern. The Order of Daikoku, being one of the other Damasu temples, assures the government that Daikoku would have sent such a warning if he were not displeased due to some currently-unknown sin.

3) Strong winds in affected villages: Country monks in the provinces known to be on the lookout for fierce windstorms, and they especially know to report any which cause widespread damage and destruction. The sovereign temples in the capital received no such reports.

4) Prophetic dreams warning of the coming blight: People throughout the domain ought to have had vivid and disturbing dreams about the crops being destroyed or overrun by noxious growths. Thus far, the initial inquiry indicated that that few if any farmers in the provinces can remember such dreams, yet this should have been so widespread as to be the talk of every town in Damasu lands.

5) Augural readings from divinations being performed to predict the coming crop: Those skilled in the art of divination perform readings to predict the quality and quantity of the upcoming crop every year. The signs and omens that they read can be interpreted in a variety of ways, but they should have pointed to the same grim conclusion of the harvest will be ruined by a blight or pestilence. Yet this did not happen!

6) A blood rain: A strange and unsettling rain has sometimes fallen over the region prior to crop blights, appearing to be colored red. The rain is usually accompanied by an unusual smell or taste, and for previous severe blights it has sometimes stained the crops and the earth. (In Lion lands, a red rain is always a sign of impending disaster or a harbinger of war.)

7) A long dry spell: This one actually did happen, and is the only omen to have given any hint about the kumosaya blight. It’s unclear why this and only this sign was given, while all of the others failed to manifest.

Some other members of The Order have encouraged the PCs to make use of the present crisis to right wrongs in the domain. As they journey from place to place, look out for any wrongdoing by the wealthy and powerful and then find a way to credibly argue that this was the cause of some individual sign failing to manifest. This would allow the PCs to right a variety of wrongs in addition to solving the overarching mystery. It will be up to the PCs whether or not to employ this tactic.

One of the PCs is a disciple of Nanube, a member of Lord Moon's heavenly court.  Nanube is known as the Deceiver, or sometimes more simply as the Liar.  Here is a high-level description of Nanube:

With this in mind, suppose that one of the PCs wanted to swear a vow to Nanube that they would use each and every one of these failed omens and portents in order to "take down" a human or family or institution which was guilty of wrongdoing, by framing them of being the reason why these omens and portents did not trigger.  The idea is that lies will bring about justice when the truth has failed.

"I, (NAME), disciple of Nanube the Deceiver, do solemnly vow before Lord Moon and his servant Nanube, to exploit each and every one of the failed omens and portents that ought to have forewarned us of the fungal blight kumosaya.  In the name of justice, I shall craft tales and weave deceptions to ensure punishment for those guilty of wrongdoing, those who prosper through injustice and greed.

I shall find those who are guilty of great sins, and I pledge to bring low these offenders, be they man, woman, family, or institution, by painting their sins as the reason why the omens and portents did not manifest.  I will use the power of lies, not to hide, but to uncover the truth of their transgressions, to right the wrongs, to protect the innocent, and to strike down the guilty.  I may never discover the truth or bring those truly responsible for this absence of premonitions, and I will surely provoke the ire of those I condemn, but I remain dedicated to punishing evildoers.

I vow to exploit the darkness to bring about the light, to use deception to reveal the truth, to use lies as a tool for justice when the truth has failed.  I will be the whisper in the darkness, the unseen hand that stirs the pot, and the voice that shapes the course of events.

By the light of Lord Moon, by the wits of Nanube, and by my own determination, I swear this vow. To break it would be to betray not only my fellow humans who suffer in this world, but also the essence of myself.  In the face of trials, in the heart of conflict, in the eyes of the guilty, I will not falter. For my lies are my weapon, my shield, my truth. So swear I, (NAME)."

Here's a vow which the Order of Daikoku is pressuring the Minister of Revenue to swear:

"I, (NAME), as Damasu's Minister of Revenue, do swear by Daikoku, the Patron of Wealth and Harvest, and by Fukurokujin, the Patron of Wisdom and Mercy, to exercise my duty with diligence and compassion in these trying times. I vow to use the powers entrusted to me to alleviate the burdens of those suffering most from the blight of kumosaya.

I pledge to seek out and implement policies that will reduce tax and rent burdens on those most afflicted by this calamity, to the best of my ability and within the limits of my power.  I vow to refuse the collection of moneys from those whose larders are empty, whose fields are barren, and whose futures are uncertain due to this devastating blight. I promise to strive to ensure that no family starves because they are burdened with debts they cannot pay.

Although I am but one man, I pledge to exert my influence to enforce policies of compassion, and I shall labor tirelessly to ensure that those under my authority adhere to the spirit of this vow.  I swear this vow in all humility, knowing that its fulfillment lies as much in the hearts and minds of those I lead as it does in my own efforts.

By the grace of Daikoku and Fukurokujin, and in their names, I swear this vow."

Here's the vow of devotion sworn by members of the Order of Daikoku:

"I, [Monk’s Name], vow unto Daikoku, the embodiment of wealth and harvest, and to the Order that serves him. I surrender myself to the wisdom and authority of the Abbot, and to the teachings and principles of our sacred Order.

I commit to nurturing the abundance around me and within me, just as Daikoku nurtures the prosperity of the world. I am mindful that wealth is not a reward, but a responsibility; not a privilege, but a mandate to serve.

I shall embrace their wisdom with humility and dedication, acknowledging their insight as the fruit of a profound connection with the cycles of life and bounty. In devotion, I strive to walk the path towards enlightenment, transcending the bonds of scarcity and suffering.

Under the watchful eyes of Daikoku and the Fortunes, I pledge my loyalty and dedication to this sacred journey. I vow to uphold the abundance and generosity of Daikoku, the ceaseless cycle of prosperity and harvest, as I strive to align my spirit with his rhythm, becoming an active echo of his divine abundance."

Another example is the Vow of consumption to Lord Moon sworn by a different member of The Order:

"In the silvery gaze of the ever-changing Lord Moon, I, [Name], solemnly swear my vow of consumption. As Lord Moon feasts on celestial flesh and imbibes the ambrosia of the heavens, so too will I partake of the earthly bounty, a reflection of the divine banquet above.

Each day, as sure as the moon follows the sun, I will feast upon the flesh of animals and drink from the cup of spirits, these actions serving as a testament of my commitment to Lord Moon. In doing so, I shall honor his insatiable hunger and thirst, mirroring them in my own earthly existence.

I trust this vow to serve as a continuous connection to Lord Moon, reminding me of his raw, primal power. Let my daily indulgence fortify me, just as Lord Moon draws strength from his celestial feast.

In my meals and libations, I shall remember the celestial grace that sustains us all. May my strength, in turn, reflect the mighty Lord Moon, using it both for personal gain as well as for the greater good. This I vow, in the name of Lord Moon, the mighty and unpredictable."

And the public-facing vow to Bishamon with similar terms:

"In the sight of Bishamon, the stalwart Fortune of Strength, I, [Name], pledge my vow of consumption. Inspired by my past of scarcity and hardship, I promise to savor the strength of the earth, in meat and spirits, each day and night, as a testament to my perseverance and will.

Just as Bishamon endures, so too will I endeavor to fulfill this vow, even in the face of adversity. My past poverty taught me the value of these gifts, and so I honor Bishamon by partaking of them daily, drawing strength from my commitment.

My vow serves as a reminder of the blessings we often take for granted. Each meal, each drink, will bolster my resolve, and remind me of the strength and endurance embodied by Bishamon.

In this act, I shall remember the people, the land, and the divine strength that provides for us. May my own strength, in turn, reflect that of Bishamon, used not for personal gain but for the betterment of all. This I swear, in the name of Bishamon, the unyielding Fortune of Strength."





MAHO AND BLOODSPEAKERS:

Now that we've talked about vows and proper doctrine, I'd like to cover heresies and enemies of the Celestial Order.

Maho, a.k.a “blood magic”, is any form of magic outlawed by the Emperor.  The practice of maho is punishable by death.

There is a difference between tsukai and bloodspeakers, though many people use the terms interchangeably.

A “tsukai” is a witch, i.e. anyone who practices maho. All tsukai are infected with the Shadowlands taint as part of their practice of witchcraft, and this taint is detectable, especially by shugenja, who can detect the taint by communing with the elemental kami.

A “bloodspeaker” is a specific type of tsukai who has the supernatural ability to conceal the Shadowlands taint. Shugenja are unable to overcome this - even the most powerful shugenja who are the most in-tune with the elemental kami cannot detect the Shadowlands taint when concealed by a well-trained bloodspeaker. Witch Hunters have a form of Detect Taint which is sometimes able to overcome a bloodspeaker’s taint-concealing abilities, though even this is unreliable, and more powerful Bloodspeakers can usually evade this.  The good news is that if an entire suspected coven is rounded up, the Witch Hunters usually only have to be successful 1 time in order for the coven to be found out.

Notably, a bloodspeaker can no longer conceal the taint in their body after they’re dead, so one surefire way for a Witch Hunter or shugenja to tell for sure if someone is tainted is to kill them and then check. This is only done in extraordinary circumstances, as Imperial law forbids the mass killing of peasants simply to root out a single individual.

Remember: all bloodspeakers are tsukai, but not all tsukai are bloodspeakers. (In other words, there are some tsukai out in the countryside who cannot conceal their taint, and if they ever draw attention to themselves they will be easily found out.)

The Office of the Jade Champion is in charge of the Kuni Witch Hunters, who are responsible for hunting tsukai. There are about 200 Witch Hunters in the Empire, so while smaller domains don’t have a Witch Hunter, most domains do.  (There are around 350 domains total.)

There are many different types of maho, because maho is not really a single practice – the textbook list of the 7 maho disciplines for Witch hunters and other authorities to watch out for are:

→ Shadowlands taint magic:

This is the basis of most tsukai practices, and witches are able to take on additional Shadowlands taint in order to give themselves extra powers, strengthening themselves or cursing others through the direct application of channeled Shadowlands energy. Some textbooks list this discipline as "Curses", but this is misleading because taking on Shadowlands taint has other applications such as increasing a tsukai’s physical prowess, which is why it’s more correctly listed as the general Shadowlands taint magic.

→ Name magic:

Tsukai gain power based on the strength of their own name, and based on the strength of names they take. Many spells and rituals involve sacrificing a name.

Tsukai are interesed in taking the names of others – they must merely ask you to give them your name and have you answer by stating your name. When this has been repeated 3 times in succession the tsukai owns your name.

Name magic was not originally considered a maho discipline until Hantei Iuchiban became the first bloodspeaker and used name magic to corrupt the officer corps of the 1st Imperial Legion.

→ Wound magic:

Tsukai practice bloodletting of themselves and of victims in order to fuel their magic. Any human magic driven by wounds is considered maho. (Ratling shamans sometimes practice ritual bloodletting, but this has been classified as non-maho because of the special nature of Ratlings and the fact that they are biologically incapable of carrying the Shadowlands taint.)

→ Summoning:

One of the most famous tsukai abilities, this is most notably used to summon oni from jigoku, but is also used to summon mujina (jigoku trickster spirits), kansen (corrupted kami/spirits), zombies (given a supply of corpses), ghosts, etc.

→ Crafting:

The most famous items crafted by tsukai are obsidian blades, and they also create totems which they use to store power they generate from sacrificial rituals. In theory tsukai can make all manner of interesting things, though this usually involves the sacrifice of some other object which itself already had great name.  For example, the creation of an obsidian sword requires the sacrifice of a sword whose name is itself very famous, as it is the strength of the original sword's name which serves as the source of power for the creation of the obsidian blade.

→ Dark Divinination:

Tsukai can learn secrets from those whose names they know, starting always with what they fear, desire, and regret. Such knowledge is often the basis for subsequent curses.  It is for this reason that Witch Hunters rarely tell anyone their true name.  Instead, they choose a name for themselves at their gempukku but only declare that name at the ceremony, and then assume a false name for their entire lives.

This practice is regarded with extreme suspicion, as many people who are experts in the connections between the living and their ancestors have credibly claimed that it prevents Witch Hunters from being able to be guided by their ancestors, or from having their deeds echo through the realm of the honored dead.  However, this has never been proven, nor has the Imperial Ministry of Rites or the Office of the Jade Champion ever taken any position on this matter.

→ Fleshshaping:

One of the least common areas of maho, this is most famously used by the Kadi sorcerers of Medin al Salaat, who give themselves inhuman features and abilities by changing their own bodies. This is significantly less common in Rokugan, since that’s kind of a giveaway which would prevent them from remaining hidden among the peasant population, though particularly malicious tsukai may inflict horrific disfigurement on victims they capture.

While many maho practices involve only 1 of the maho disciplines, the most powerful tsukai perform rituals which combine several disciplines and usually require several practitioners. For example, consider summoning an oni:

→ It requires so much blood to be shed that an entire coven is usually required, since a single tsukai would be killed by the wounds.

→ It requires so much Shadowlands taint to be channeled that it would overwhelm any one tsukai and drive them mad or worse.

→ It requires the sacrifice of a name of considerable weight (Recognition) to give the oni the ability to inhabit this realm.

→ It's the most difficult of the summoning arts, requiring a tsukai who has already mastered the lesser forms of summoning.

This combines 4 of the 7 maho disciplines, and most maho rituals are similar in that regard.

There are also some forms of maho which do not actually involve the Shadowlands taint or the shedding of blood. For example, there are many things a shugenja could theoretically do to empower their magic through the taking and sacrificing of names. However, this is banned, as Name magic is one of the 7 maho disciplines outlawed by Imperial decree.

One of the earliest works of literature about the early days of the Empire is the court historian Hantei Kajimitsu’s “History of Early Rokugan”, which opens with this description:

"Before the rise of our Great Ancestors humanity amounted to little. Their hands ran red with blood, they ate ravenously the flesh of animals, and their bodies were unbathed and ungroomed. The original religious practices of the unguided peasants included the worship of local gods and minor fortunes who could bless families and land with fertility, prosperity and good fortune or wrack them with disasters and sterility. Maho cults also existed and although not all human beings practiced maho, the practice of maho was both commonplace and accepted. Ancient maho practices were identical to modern maho, except that they were commonplace and not illegalized. Using sacrifices of blood and children, cultists sought to appease the dark gods of Jigoku and yield crops from the soil. Because agricultural techniques of the early humans were undeveloped, the thirst of the soil for their blood was great."

The Great Ancestors who founded the 7 Great Clans required that any warlord who swore fealty to them foreswear the practices of maho and make it illegal in their domains. However, as Hantei Kajimitsu later mentions:

"Although maho was made illegal after the founding of the Empire, it is unfortunately the case that some of the subjects of the Hantei continue to practice unclean maho."

For centuries this practice was limited by the ability of shugenja to detect the Shadowlands taint. If a tsukai was performing unclean acts which spread the Shadowlands taint within a city, then a shugenja could be dispatched to seek out its source and kill any tsukai they found. While some tsukai persisted in trying to remain hidden in large cities, most tsukai remained in the countryside, far away from the prying gaze of most shugenja. Unless their practices spread so much corruption that it rose to the government’s notice or their peasant neighbors dared to report them to the authorities, tsukai covens could operate undetected for many generations.

Most countryside tsukai know very little of maho – because its practice is heretical it is difficult for them to study together or share their knowledge widely. Hedge-witch tsukai of the countryside usually know only a few spells and rites. The most common practice is to use flesh-altering abilities to heal sickness or injuries in their peasant neighbors, often in exchange for the names of their “patients”. A few learn how to curse their enemies, even fewer know how to create blood-artifacts of any power, and fewer still know the art of summoning oni.

The corruption of the Shadowlands taint interferes with other magics, and shugenja who attempt to wield maho quickly find that their connection to the elemental kami weakens and even goes away completely, and they lose their ability to call upon the elements.  This makes shugenja inherently somewhat trustworthy on the question of maho, because if they were doing things like summoning oni, then they would lose the source of their power, and they are able to prove that they have not turned into tsukai simply by casting one of their ordinary elemental spells.

This distinction also speaks to the ways in which maho practices were the original religion practiced by the peasantry of Rokugan before the founding of the Empire.  In many ways, the tsukai of today are simply continuing to practice the religion of their ancestors.  This is heretical and illegal, but it explains why so many are open to the idea, for reasons other than just the power that it offers.

Isawa himself, who founded the Isawa family, is known to have practiced maho.  He created many totems using the crafting discipline, and performed rituals to store the power of the names and wounds of his defeated enemies in these totems through blood sacrifices.  It was Shiba who convinced him to set aside these ways for the future of the new Phoenix clan, though the Isawa family is rumored to maintain many texts on maho in their secret libraries, for the Phoenix clan values knowledge more highly than any other clan.

There is one extremely notable exception to the Phoenix clan's renunciation of the practice of maho.  Isawa Akuma was a shugenja in the Phoenix clan who lived in the 3rd century who was fascinated by maho.  He studied everything he could find on the subject and is said to have sought out tsukai, and rather than arresting them he offered to exchange his wisdom for theirs, learning from them and teaching them many of the hidden secrets of the Phoenix.

Akuma was the most cunning and intelligent members of the Phoenix clan, and eventually he was able to somehow discover how to wield maho without losing his spellcasting ability!  It is unknown how this is even possible - the elemental kami hate the Shadowlands taint above all else, and the abilities of a shugenja rely on the favor of the elemental kami.  A shugenja is not simply directing power themselves, but rather channeling their own chi in order to call upon the kami to answer their prayers.  And the kami would never respond to a man so deeply tainted as would be required for the practice of powerful maho.

Some have theorized that Akuma is so skilled that he has not defied this limitation, but rather has become so skilled at the practices of maho and spellcasting that he has managed to avoid taking so much Shadowlands taint as to become permanently tainted.  This would be a staggering accomplishment, as some of his feats of maho are so impressive that even the most famous tsukai would be nearly killed by the amount of taint involved, and because of this there are many who reject this theory.

Others have wondered whether Akuma has instead learned how to expel the Shadowlands taint from his body.  Perhaps he DOES lose his spellcasting ability for a time, but through intense self-control over his own body and chi he might have discovered a technique by which someone who has become "permanently" tainted can reverse this effect and recover back to an untainted state.  Others claim that this is even more ludicrous, as the taint is known to settle into a person's marrow, from which it spreads to the rest of the body through the blood, and there are no known principles by which this could possibly be reversed.

There are other theories as well, that Akuma abandons one body for another by being a disembodied spirit which possesses untainted victims and continues to wield his shugenja powers that way... that he has learned to wield some form of magic similar to shugenja control over the elements but distinct from it... etc.

Before Akuma's practice of maho became known, he journeyed deep into the Isawa Woodlands, far from prying eyes, and performed his greatest feat, using his own name to summon a powerful oni lord, Oni no Akuma.

This oni was so massive and powerful that it warped place in the Isawa Woodlands, creating a new "between place" coexistent between the mortal realm and Jigoku.  Because Akuma summoned an oni whose thirst for knowledge matched his own, this oni took the form of a great library, which is said to contain "all of the things that have ever been written, and many of the things which never were written, and more than a few things which will come to be written".

Akuma then set out to read through the sources of knowledge and power in this chaotic and disorganized library which was created by his oni and which is the oni.  Akuma himself was not able to control the oni - although most summoners are able to command the oni which they summon, such a powerful oni lord was required that it will respond to no human commands.  Thankfully for Akuma, this merely means that it treats him like any other visitor, offering its shelves full of nonsense and wisdom and madness and knowledge and lies and power to any who make their way to him.

Over the next few years, Akuma began to publish some of the greatest foundational works of scholarship the Empire had ever seen.  Many of the concepts behind vows I described earlier in our conversation are included in his book "On Vows to the Fortunes".  His work "On Soothsaying" contains the definitive classification and description of the various forms of augury and prophecy.  There are many other examples... and as his scholarship grew, so did the power of his name, and thus so did the oni which formed his Great Library.

Eventually the source of his knowledge was discovered, and his death warrant was signed, effectively exiling him.  This seemed to matter little to Akuma, who was happy to take refuge in his library.  The oni which protects the library and which is the library will not permit any who travel there to attack other visitors, and it would take an army to defeat it.  Unfortunately, that is challenging, because the library can never be found the same way twice.  All of the normal paths through the Isawa Woodlands which might lead one to the library have already been taken, and therefore travelers who seek it out must journey through more unusual routes, taking them in and out of the mortal realm in order to find their way there.

The Empire hoped that Akuma's oni would eventually pull itself into Jigoku after his death, but he surprised and defied the wishes of the Empire by attaining immortality.  He is one of only 3 shugenja confirmed to have ever accomplished this feat, the 2nd shugenja in the Empire's history to have done so (the 1st was Isawa no Naka Kuro, the Grand Master of the Elements, who dwells at the Temple of the Four Elements in the Spine of the World Mountains_.

It is unknown whether Akuma's apparently immortality is the result of absolute mastery over the elements, or because of his dark practices of maho.  Tsukai have been known to attain immortality and thus escape the cycle of death and rebirth through the absolute mastery of their fears, desires, and regrets.  Monks have been known to do so through reaching enlightenment.  Even mundane artisans have been said to have achieved immortality through complete devotion to their mundane crafts - the founder of the Kakita Academy was a poet who is said to still wander the Empire to this day, composing sublimely beautiful works of poetry about the wonders of the natural world around him.

Regardless, Akuma remains an entity at large in the world today.  Unlike most dangerous tsukai, he appears to mainly be interested in the pursuit of knowledge, and seems to have few political opinions and no desire for temporal power.  His works of scholarship are still copied and studied because of their well-established correctness, though he is believed to not be their true author, and is thought to have pilfered them from his Great Library.

It is for this reason that copies of books which he published always open with some version of this disclaimer:

"This book was originally published by Isawa Akuma, who was later discovered to have stolen it from the Great Library. It’s true authorship is unknown. Anyone who discovers a copy of this book without this disclaimer is ordered to report it to the office of the Jade Champion."

The thinking is that books he published such as "On Vows to the Fortunes" or "On Soothsaying" were written by someone who was never born, or possibly the books would have otherwise not come to be written for centuries, and Akuma found these text and published them, attributing them to himself, which fueled his name even further.  Some point out in private that this cannot be proven and he may have indeed written some or all of the works attributed to him, but few would dare to publicly contradict the Office of the Jade Champion.

What I just described is somewhat different than the character of Isawa Akuma as described in the original L5R published books, but I wanted to make the character explore the boundaries between the different magic systems which exist in Rokugan.  It's a case where I've established a principle and then introduced a seeming contradiction into a coherent world and system.

Now let's talk about Iuchiban (the first and most famous bloodspeaker) and his lieutenants.

The Emperor’s second son at the end of the 5th century (~600 years ago) was Hantei Iuchiban. Like most second sons of the Emperor, Iuchiban commanded the 1st Imperial Legion to guard the Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands at Chai Sedo. As usual, this was for the purpose of “keeping him away from the temptation of entangling alliances with those who might seek to subvert authority of the crown prince”. However, Prince Iuchiban “craved the power that the Fortunes had fated his elder brother should have, and sought to gain it by maho” (citation Asahina Toshiro in “Trying Times”). To this end, he used his authority to acquire tomes about the functioning of maho, intending to learn its ways and wield it as an unexpected weapon in an eventual coup. This was also before trade with gaijin lands was banned after the Battle of White Stag, which happened 300 years later (which is ~300 years ago, as my current campaign takes place in the year 1129 of the Rokugani calendar), which made it much easier for Prince Iuchiban to send emmissaries to Medin al Salaat across the desert, seeking out the khadi of that city.

From his seat of authority at Chai Sedo, Iuchiban began gathering disciples to him. While most of his followers were killed when he launched his coup against his brother, the most powerful survived due to being able to return after the destruction of their bodies, and many remain at large in the Empire today. Most have taken the “Jama” name, which Iuchiban invented as a way to identify those in his service in a twisted perversion of a noble samurai name.

For reference, in my version of Rokugan, the format of a normal samurai name is “<family> no <house> <personal>”. For example, one of my player's characters is “Akodo no Sugiwara Natsuki”, marking him as being from the Sugiwara house of the Akodo family. The word “no” means “of”, and this part is generally omitted for people from the ruling house of a family. For example, we would usually just say “Kitsuki Tetsu” and only in extremely formal circumstances refer to “Kitsuki no Kitsuki Tetsu”. In less formal contexts, the Family name is often dropped – for example, we usually refer to “Shosuro no Seri Go” simply as “Seri Go”.

Jama names substitute the tsukai master who inducted the apprentice. Iuchiban’s followers have names like “Jama no Iuchiban Kohaku”, and his disciples have names like “Jama no Kohaku Jin”, etc.

Iuchiban surpassed all who brought maho knowledge to him, and many of his servants were directly responsible for learning and disseminating some specific maho practice.

This account differs somewhat from the original description of Iuchiban in the original L5R books, though I don't think I've actually changed all that much - mainly I've clarified and expanded upon details which were already present.

By way of background, I’ll list some of his most famous disciples, specifically the ones which are still alive and at large after all these centuries.  I'll start with Jama no Iuchiban Suru.

Before adopting the Jama name, Shiba no Iga Suru was the one who first brought maho texts to Iuchiban, particularly the writings of a mad Kuni shugenja who was driven to insanity from too much exposure to the taint while fighting the forces of the Shadowlands. It was these writings which began Iuchiban’s journey into the practice of maho. Together, the two of them conducted what prayers and rituals they could manage from reading these texts alone, but it soon became clear they needed more expertise.

Suru is notable for being one of the only remaining disciples of Iuchiban from the samurai caste, and to this day he is said to travel in noble circles, kidnapping and impersonating traveling samurai. He then uses this position to learn the fears, desires, and regrets of those in power, seeking out those who might be willing to give him their names in exchange for his aid in achieving their political ambitions. with the promise to never reveal his role in assisting them. Because of this secrecy, it’s unknown just how many of the political happenings of the Empire have involved Suru’s influence.

Suru ultimately uses the names of famous nobles to fuel powerful rituals. Suru was directly responsible for resurrecting Iuchiban, and the Great Famine of the 7th century is thought to be Suru’s doing. He has been killed many times but always resurrected by his allies and disciples.

Another terrifying disciple of Iuchiban is Jama Musume.  Unlike the others who have taken the Jama name, she does not add the "no Iuchiban" qualifier, on the basis that she herself originally instructed Iuchiban herself.

The writings of the mad Kuni shugenja brought to Iuchiban by Suru mentioned an old peasant tsukai-woman known as “the dark daughter of Fu Leng”. Suru sought her out and convinced her to come to their aid, teaching the ways of maho to the most trusted of Iuchiban’s retainers. While she began as Iuchiban’s instructor, he eventually surpassed her and taught her the maho disciplines she had previously lacked.

Musume assisted Iuchiban in his coup attempt, but was not killed, and was the only one of Iuchiban’s former lieutenants who was absent after his resurrection. She is known to live in the Shadowlands, where she occasionally ambushes Crab raiding parties. Instead of killing them, she takes their swords and and tells them a date and place at which they can reclaim them if they defeat her oni. Bushi will typically return to the Shadowlands with a small army, allowing them to easily defeat the oni and reclaim their lost swords. Unfortunately, this serves Musume’s purposes quite nicely, since the larger a force is brought, the more people learn of her name and carry the memory of her oni, thus further increasing her power.  (Remember that tsukai gain strength based on the number of people who know their name, especially when those people have strong emotional feelings of fear, desire, and or regret when thinking of that name.)

Musume is never present when these armies appear to kill Oni no Musume, since she has no need to be there in order for her purpose to be achieved. Instead, she can remain safely elsewhere, not putting herself at risk of the inconvenience of being slain, and indeed it is unclear whether she has ever been killed.

Another of Iuchiban's disciples is Asahina Yajinden.

Iuchiban’s plans could never have succeeded so long as the Shadowlands taint was so easily detected by shugenja. Convinced that there must exist some method by which the taint could be hidden, Iuchiban reached out to a smith of great renown, hoping that Yajinden could construct amulets capable of concealing the Shadowlands taint in its wearers. Although Yajinden failed in this effort, his research and collaboration with Iuchiban resulted in Iuchiban himself inventing the maho practice of concealing the Shadowlands taint from the divinations of shugenja.

Yajinden perfected the maho practice of crafting, and taught Iuchiban’s disciples how to use the names of objects as an alternative to the names of people – in particular he invented the method of sacrificing the name of a famous sword in order to create a cursed obsidian sword. Yajinden himself proceeded to create what have been described as the 4 most powerful obsidian blades ever smithed, known as the 4 “Bloodswords” (Ambition, Revenge, Judgement, and Passion) and was said to have been working on a 5th bloodsword (Treachery) when Iuchiban was defeated.

Yajinden was captured by the Emerald Champion after Iuchiban’s coup attempt. It’s unknown how he managed to escape, since his maho practices revolved almost entirely around crafting. Interestingly, his escape was reported to have occurred many years later, implying that he was not immediately put to death, and Yajinden is said to have assisted the Emperor’s advisors in containing the spirit of Iuchiban to prevent him from being resurrected. However, after managing to escape, Yajinden is said to manufacture obsidian swords and other maho artifacts for bloodspeakers, and train their brightest maho-smith apprentices on how to do the same.

I have much more written about Yajinden, but one thing to note for future reference is that often when telling these kinds of histories, the information is supposed to be somewhat unreliable.  This is what people believe to be true, and most of it is true, but there may be individual parts of the story which is later revealed to be falsehoods spread for some political or religious purpose.  My intention is to have Rokugan be a place whose history books are not entirely reliable, just as modern historians regard many ancient sources as having their own biases and inaccuracies.

One of the most famous disciples of Iuchiban is Jama no Iuchiban Kyoso.

Known as “queen of oni”, Kyoso began as a legionnaire in the 1st Imperial Legion from either the Kitsu family of the Lion or the Yogo family of the Scorpion. (Each family disclaims her, and there are credible historical accounts supporting her ancestry from either family.) Kyoso quickly mastered the lesser summonings taught by the maho texts of Jama Suru and the teachings of Jama Musume, easily summoning swamp spirits and mujina and kansen. Kyoso’s intuitions about these practices changed how humans understood oni summoning. It was Kyoso who explained that oni require a name to be summoned, not as payment, but because nothing without a name can exist in our realm. The name is what permits the oni to possess a physical form, and the nature of the oni’s form in Jigoku therefore has even more effect on the form it takes in our realm as any material components used to anchor its spirit to a physicality in our reality.

Kyoso made further discoveries in the practice of oni summoning. Prior to her, any tsukai who wished to summon an oni required either their own name or a name which someone chose to give to them. While blood sacrifices had previously allowed tsukai to use the names of sacrifical victims, it was Kyoso who discovered how to use the name of someone at the moment of their death to summon an oni. For centuries, this has allowed bloodspeakers to summon oni using the names of victims who would die rather than surrender their own names, even under torture. This has led to the targeting of countless samurai by bloodspeaker covens over the years, as the protection of righteousness and indomitable will no longer prevents your name from helping a bloodspeaker’s summonings.

Kyoso’s other discovery was even more significant, which is that of “dismissing” and “recalling” oni. Prior to her, a tsukai who summoned an oni would have to find somewhere to keep it. Even out in the countryside, this could spread its taint to the countryside enough to be noticed. Even worse, a traveling tsukai who kept their oni close enough to come to their defense would almost certainly be seen. Kyoso discovered that it was possible to send a summoned oni back into Jigoku, and then recall it at a moment’s notice. This process of recall needs far less preparation and ritual than the initial summoning, though it still requires a great expenditure of resources – typically a name almost as large as the one used to summon the oni, or many lesser names, or some combination of names, Shadowlands taint, and wounds. Even worse, Kyoso is said to have further refined this process to allow the oni itself to return when certain conditions are met, such as the death of the bloodspeaker who summoned it – this means that even when a powerful bloodspeaker is taken by surprise and beheaded instantly, their attackers may still have to fight their oni afterwards.

The final bloodspeaker I've written extensive backstory for in the "rogues' gallery" of Iuchiban lieutenants is an entirely original creation - all of the others are mostly or loosely based on characters from original L5R.  I have extensive notes about him because he has actually appeared as a character in some of my past L5R adventures while I've been a GM, Jama no Iuchiban Kohaku:

Kohaku was a traveling monk whose pilgrimage brought him to Chai Sedo (the temple at the Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands, which is itself a narrow valley in the Twilight Mountains on the western side of the Empire) while Iuchiban was stationed there as the general of the 1st Imperial Legion. With Iuchiban’s influence, Kohaku was made the abbot of Chai Sedo, based on his scholarly acumen and understanding of the Tao. It was Kohaku who Iuchiban dispatched as an emmissary to Medin al Salaat to seek out the underground khadi who were still forced by the Ki Rin to stay hidden and make deals from the shadows. Kohaku succeeded in mastering their ways, even learning the khadi secret of removing one’s heart, which he returned to teach to Iuchiban and his fellow disciples.

Interestingly, Jama no Kohaku Jin told the PCs during my previous campaign that removing one’s heart does not grant immortality, and that instead it is the mastery of one’s fears, desires, and regrets which does that. He indicated that the removal of the heart helps you attain this mastery, but that most who perform the ritual are still mortal and their removed heart will stop beating when their body dies. Jin claimed that there is some amount of life extension and resistance to wounds and age and sickness which is granted by the ritual, but that the common beliefs about heart-removal are mistaken.  This is something I've already alluded to - the common belief is that bloodspeakers attain immortality by removing their hearts and keeping them somewhere safe, but in actuality it is about mastering their fears, desires, and regrets.

After Iuchiban’s defeat, while Jama Suru proceeded to recruit and gain power from noble samurai, Jama Kohaku recruited peasants. He is known to have personally sought out countryside tsukai and from all over the Empire and taught them how to conceal the Shadowlands taint, allowing them to expand their covens and migrate from the countryside into larger cities without being found. Because of his focus on evangelism to the peasantry, more bloodspeaker covens broken up by Witch Hunters have been linked to Kohaku than any other bloodspeaker.

When a powerful oni lord known as The Maw gathered an army within the Shadowlands, it was Kohaku who combined explosives with powerful maho to blast a hole in the Kaiu Wall, allow the Maw to invade the Empire. Even worse, Kohaku diverted a Shadowlands river through the opened hole in the Kaiu wall, flooding and tainting the Hiruma countryside, which ultimately prevented the Crab from reclaiming Hiruma castle after the Maw was defeated at the Battle of Cresting Wave.

After Iuchiban was defeated, his soul was bound to the Forgotten Tomb. Jama Suru performed unknown rituals to break it free, but it was Jama Kohaku who used his khadi-trained flesh-shaping abilities to construct a new body for Iuchiban’s spirit to inhabit. Kohaku continued to serve as one of Iuchiban’s trusted lieutenants until Iuchiban’s second death at the Battle of Sleeping River.

More recently, Kohaku appeared at Kyuden Hida on the most recent Day of Thunder. The Seven Thunders defeated the dark avatar of Lord Moon, Shinja Jotsu, before Kohaku could arrive. Kohaku proceeded to take revenge on behalf of Shinjo Jotsu, declaring himself an ally of the Moon Cult, and urging all cultists to travel to Kyuden Shinjo, where the moon cult was still strong. This led directly to the overthrow of Shinjo Yokatsu, who turned out to be a moon cultist. The Lion Clan felt this did not go far enough, and invaded Unicorn lands with the declared intention to drive out any remaining moon cultists once and for all, though they were defeated after Shinja Hanari called in the Moto, who defeated the invading Ikoma armies of the Lion Clan at the Battle of Dark Edge Village.

At least, that's what is generally known and believed.  Jama no Kohaku Jin now claims that the overthrow of the moon cult in Shinjo lands was his idea, and that he asked “master Haku” (which is what he calls Kohaku) to declare his allegiance to the moon cult and reveal its stronghold in Kyuden Shinjo specifically to cause “the samurai” to destroy it. Bloodspeakers are known to often take credit for such things, though it’s still a plausible story, since as Shiba Tsuchida pointed out, “it’s a perfect example of how evil feeds upon itself”. Then again, it could just as easily be an attempt by Jin to cover up an embarrassing mistake.

An even more recent event indirectly linked to Kohaku was the exploits of one of his other apprentices, Jama no Kohaku Hoshiko, who was known to be with Jama Kohaku on the recent Day of Thunder. For years, a historian assigned to the post of Ratling agent for the 3rd Imperial Legion by Kyuden Hida helped samurai track down the lost swords of people’s fallen ancestors who died in the Shadowlands. One day, after a man named Kakita Hio won such a duel with his recovered ancestor’s sword, a mujina appeared and declared that all of these recovered swords had been cursed by Jama no Kohaku Hoshiko, and the mujina named the date and place within the Shadowlands where those who wished could seek revenge and break the curse by slaying the oni through which the curse was bound. (Hoshiko has evidently learned the technique from Jama Musume of convincing samurai to spread her name for their own purposes, thus empowering her.)

When a small army showed up on the date in question, Oni no Hoshiko was indeed slain, but evidently Hoshiko had also studied the techniques of Jama Kyoso and managed to summon/form a rust oni which was speficially able to ruin swords. While many were wounded, not one samurai died in the fight against the oni, yet every sword carried by all members of the attacking army were ruined beyond repair. This gives each member of the army a right of vengeance against Jama no Kohaku Hoshiko, which permits them to spread her name when done so in the furtherance of their search for her, which is how many well-informed people would know her name, especially those who keep abreast of such matters. Hoshiko is an excellent example of how modern bloodspeakers often combine the teachings of many of Iuchiban’s disciples - in her case Kohaku, Musume, and Kyoso - in order to wield their power more effectively.

Here's what I've written up about the history of Iuchiban's coup attempts and the fallout they generated:

Iuchiban’s coup:

Armed with the ability to infiltrate the capital without their maho being detected, Iuchiban and his disciples journeyed to Otosan Uchi. They slowly began to raise the bodies of the honored dead in the Imperial crypt underneath Otosan Uchi, with the intention to mount a surprise attack on the Imperial court. At the same time, they began quietly abducting members of the Imperial Chancellary whose names they used to power their spells and rituals.

This was ultimately discovered before their preparations were complete, and a group of investigators drawn from the each of the 7 Great Clans uncovered Iuchiban’s activities and slew him in the resulting battle before he could escape. The similarities between this event and the original Day of Thunder were not lost on people afterwards, and it was an open question for many years whether this event was another Day of Thunder. The implications are not trivial – if the original Day of Thunder established the supremacy of humanity for all time, then the stakes of such conflicts are more localized in time and place. But if humanity needs to periodically renew the Prophecy of the Age of Man (in which the Shinsei revealed that the Fortunes favor mortal man), then humanity’s future as a species is not guaranteed.

The Imperial Ministry of Rites took no direct position on this question, though many individual Imperial Ministers of Rites over the years dismissed the question as ludicrous. Recently the prophet Baiten declared that the Day of Thunder was at hand. Prince Fukuhashi, who oversaw the city of Toshi Ranbo at the time, reported that he narrowly prevented the assassination of the prophet Baiten, who was later found to have been murdered at the order of Shinjo Jotsu, the leader of the moon cult. Shinjo Jotsu’s later defeat was later revealed to be another Day of Thunder, prompting the Imperial Ministry of Rites to declare that Days of Thunder are indeed periodic events. Interestingly, the Imperial Ministry of Rites has not yet retroactively declared Iuchiban’s coup to be the Second Day of Thunder, though the growing consensus seems to be that this is obviously the case.

Because Iuchiban could not be permanently killed, the Emperor’s advisors managed to bind his soul to a prison in the Forgotten Tomb, preventing his resurrection for so long as his soul remained bound there.  While bloodspeakers who have removed their hearts and conquered their fears, desires, and regrets are able to resurrect themselves, Iuchiban's imprisonment was designed to prevent this possibility.

Bloodspeakers and Witch Hunters:

As a reminder, “tsukai” is the general term for a practitioner of maho. However, once Iuchiban developed the technique of concealing the Shadowlands taint, those tsukai who are able to conceal the taint became known as “bloodspeakers”. As we've previously discussed, all bloodspeakers are tsukai, but not all tsukai are bloodspeakers. 

This distinction led to a new urban phenomenon of bloodspeakers in cities, who were able to take advantage of dense populations to acquire more power and commit bolder acts against samurai than they could perform in the countryside. Kidnappings, murders, and larger rituals (especially on certain busy festival days) are all common.  Whereas tsukai in the days before Iuchiban were a rural phenomenon, since they could not operate in large population centers without being found by shugenja.

To combat this new bloodspeaker threat, a new Office of the Jade Champion was founded, which oversaw a new type of magistrate called “Witch Hunters”. Trained from a young age by being repeatedly exposed to the Shadowlands taint from early childhood, those Witch Hunters who survive this training are both immune to the Shadowlands taint and able to detect it even in bloodspeakers who try to conceal it. Unfortunately, this detection is not perfect, and the powerful bloodspeakers have only a small chance of being detected. Fortunately, if an entire coven is suspected, it’s likely that at least one member will fail to escape detection, and once a single bloodspeaker is found, they can reveal the identities of the others – though the identities of their coven members is often obvious based on who they spend their time consorting with.

Witch Hunters quickly grew in number and importance in order to fight against the rapid spread of bloodspeaker covens. At one point, the Hantei Emperor ordered a Witch Hunter placed in every domain capital in the Empire, with these magistrates of the Jade Champion being given jurisdiction to investigate any reports of tsukai activity anywhere. Some of these orders were later rescinded for reasons described below, and the power and influence of Witch Hunters has waxed and waned over the centuries according to the needs of the Empire.

The Gozoku:

Some Hantei Emperors need to take strong action and be closely involved in political matters throughout the Empire. Other Emperors preside over periods of prosperity which require little of their attention. During one such period, five families of the Empire collaborated to effectively seize control of the Imperial Chancellary, ensuring that their cabal were the true decisionmakers in most matters decided in the Imperial capital. Some players may have noticed that a few of the Companies in the 1st Imperial Legion are not from the ruling houses of their respective families. Those families were members of the Gozuku, and were so powerful that they obtained more wealth and influence than even the houses which ostensibly ruled them.

In case it matters for future reference, the five families of the Gozoku are:

1) The Isawa family of the Phoenix clan, which is ruled not by a daimyo but by the Council of Elemental Masters. Shiba the Great Ancestor who founded the Phoenix clan bent his knee to Isawa at the dawn of the Empire in order to show his devotion to the Empire and gain Isawa as a vassal, and the Isawa have always had final say over Phoenix clan affairs, when they choose to exercise it.

2) The Doji family of the Crane clan. Every Emperor since the dawn of the Empire has married a Doji bride, and Doji courtiers have always maintained control over the Imperial courts as the ruling family of the Crane.

3) The Tsume vassal house of the Doji family. The northernmost domain in Doji lands, Tsume lands border both the Lion and Phoenix clans, and in times of war the Tsume daimyo has often been granted the position of “General of the Northern Armies of the Crane”. This was not true in recent years, when Tsume Retsu invaded the city of Toshi Ranbo, ultimately kicking off the Lion/Crane war, much to the displeasure of the rest of the Crane clan.

4) The Bayushi family of the Scorpion clan. Just as the Lion and Crane clans are said to be the Emperor’s right and left hands in times of war (this being reversed in times of peace), the Scorpion are said always be the Emperor’s underhand, and the Bayushi have always administered the Scorpion through equal parts rulership and spycraft.

5) The Michio house of the Shosuro family of the Scorpion clan. While the largest city in the Empire is its capital of Otosan Uchi, the second largest city of Ryoko Owari lies next to Beiden Pass where the 2nd Imperial Legion is stationed, separating Lion and Scorpion lands. This is the hub of all trade in the central Empire, and lies just north of the best lands for silk cultivation.

Hantei the 16th:

Eventually the time came for the Hantei Emperor to resume direct control of many of the Empire’s affairs which had come to be managed by the Gozoku. Unfortunately, while no one would have dared disobey the Emperor, the structures of government continued to operated as they were rather than immediately shifting according to the Emperor’s will. Whether because of intentional undermining of the Emperor’s authority, or simple neglect and carelessness, Hantei the 16th found his orders not being obeyed even as every one of his subjects professed their loyalty to him.

Hantei the 16th proceeded to take a series of actions to break up the alliance of the Gozoku which led to him earning the nickname “the Steel Chrysanthemum”. For example, after Daidoji Tojo became the senior member of the Daidoji Trading Council, he staged a power-play within Crane lands to attack and discredit a childhood rival, which derailed plans the Emperor had been orchestrating for years. In retaliation, the Steel Chrysanthemum elevated him to the Fortune of Dung.  (Remember that we have previously discussed the power that Emperors claim have to elevate people to become fortunes.)

Hantei the 16th also used the Witch Hunters to investigate those who he suspected of conspiring against his interests. This led many overzealous Witch Hunters to go beyond what the Steel Chrysanthemum had ordered of them, with some going so far as to lie about the results of their tests, and condemn some suspects as tsukai who had never practiced maho. After the reign of Hantei the 16th ended, his successor rolled back the power of Witch Hunters as a direct response to the excesses they perpetrated while trying to best serve his father.

For example, Witch Hunters cannot directly accept expensive gifts. Having sworn a vow of poverty, they instead accept the gifts “on behalf of my office”, with the understanding that if/when they are ever reassigned, the gifts would stay with the office rather than departing with the person. This vow became a requirement of all Witch Hunters everywhere as part of the reforms which occurred after the reign of Hantei the 16th.

Iuchiban’s Resurrection:

It’s unclear exactly how Iuchiban’s soul was freed from the Forgotten Tomb, but Jama Suru is believed to have used the samurai names he acquired over 2 centuries to perform rituals to break the soul free, and Jama Kohaku constructed a new body for Iuchiban. Together, they gathered most (though not all) of his other surviving disciples and attempted to take the Empire by force. They began by raising an army of zombies and moved across the countryside. Any losses they sustained were quickly replenished with the bodies of fallen samurai. Recognizing the plight they faced, enemy daimyo quickly put aside their differences to stamp out this force before it could grow too large to stop. Iuchiban had counted on the Empire remaining too divided to oppose him, but he was once again defeated and slain.

Because the Forgotten Tomb could no longer be relied upon to contain Iuchiban’s soul, the Kaiu family constructed a new Tomb of Iuchiban. Its exact location is unknown, and it may be at the south end of the Twilight Mountains, or hidden somewhere in the Kuni Wastelands, or deep in the Shinomen Forest. Kaiu Gineza was the chief architect of this new tomb, and upon its completion he sealed himself inside, both to complete its unbreakable wardings and to prevent any possibility that his knowledge of its defenses could ever be used to break Iuchiban free. To this day Iuchiban has not escaped again, nor is any bloodspeaker currently alive believed capable of accomplishing such a feat.

After the return of Iuchiban, some of institutional powers stripped from Witch Hunters after the reign of the Steel Chrysanthemum were restored, though still nowhere near the point they were at their peak. There are currently only about 200 Witch Hunters stationed throughout the Empire, which has around 350 domains. Even a post as prestigious as the 1st Imperial Legion wouldn’t have an assigned Witch Hunter if not for the historical reasons for the Empire to be concerned about possible khadi influence on Chai Sedo.

One thing to note about what I've tried to do in my description of these events is to use the kinds of words and phrasings that people within the society would use.  For example, look at how I described Hantei the 16th.  Consider the sentence:

"This led many overzealous Witch Hunters to go beyond what the Steel Chrysanthemum had ordered of them, with some going so far as to lie about the results of their tests, and condemn some suspects as tsukai who had never practiced maho."

If we read that kind of thing in a history book about a real-life premodern society, we would probably conclude that the Emperor really did order the Witch Hunters to lie and falsely condemn his political opponents as tsukai so that they could be executed, which would help re-establish the Emperor's authority and strength.  And indeed, that kind of thing is my intended interpretation - anyone who reads that is supposed to think that Hantei the 16th was a complicated figure who brutally opposed his enemies, and even if they think his goals and results were mostly just or well-intentioned, they probably wouldn't want a modern Emperor to behave as he did.

However, no one in polite society would ever say that!  Instead, they would say things like, "The Emperor always does what is appropriate for his time and place.  In the past, Emperors such as the Steel Chrysanthemum behaved in ways which were appropriate to the challenges of their era, and the Hantei dynasty of today is wise enough to understand that the current era no longer demands such actions."





SHUGENJA:

Now that we've talked about "dark" practitioners of "dark" magic, let's talk about shugenja, the spellcaster priests of the Celestial Order who are members of the samurai caste.

One interesting thing to explore is the difference between the fortunes and the elemental kami.  The latter are the elemental spirits of air, earth, fire, and water which inhabit all physical things.

Shugenja can communicate with the elemental kami much more directly than anyone can communicate with the fortunes, as the elemental kami are generally smaller.  The Elemental Dragons which are the manifestation of the elements are closer to the fortunes in this regard, and are much more difficult to communicate with, even in situations where they physically manifest.

This came up in my previous campaign because a shugenja used their powers to interfere in a duel.  Here is something I wrote about this to explain shugenja and their wisdom and magics and how they interact with Rokugan's legal system:

Shugenja are extremely rare. In most clans, about 1 out of every 10,000 samurai is a shugenja. Since most domains have about half that number of samurai, about half of the domains in the Empire don’t have even a single shugenja.

Shugenja are extremely valuable. A daimyo who loses a shugenja has usually lost their only shugenja, so they’re typically extremely protective of their shugenja, above and beyond most of their other retainers.

Shugenja are human. They make mistakes and sometimes get into trouble, but as samurai they occupy roughly the same place within the celestial order as other samurai, though as priests rather than warriors.

There is no stated legal doctrine which will tell any magistrate that shugenja are treated according to different rules than any other samurai, but when you combine the above facts you end up with a system which is extremely slanted in their favor. Even an Imperial magistrate who isn’t the one losing a shugenja must understand how deeply he will anger any daimyo whose shugenja he takes away, whether through the death penalty or exile or imprisonment or forced pilgrimage or lengthy remunerative service.

Most magistrates, even Imperial magistrates, will go to extreme lengths to avoid depriving daimyo of their shugenja. Legal historians can name a number of situations in which Imperial magistrates went too far and made rulings so egregiously biased towards shugenja that their rulings were actually overturned on appeal. Rulings are only overturned in the most extreme circumstances, but the fact that a number of such cases even exist shows how far most magistrates will go to shield a shugenja from legal consequences. 

All of this despite the fact that in theory, shugenja are not to be treated any differently than anyone else who interfered in a duel, since there aren’t actually any laws, standards, or precedents saying that the rules are different for shugenja in this regard.  This is typically worked around by shugenja not being allowed to even witness duels, due to the possibility of them magically interfering.

With that being said, there are a few important cases involving shugenja and duel interference, even after it became standard practice for shugenja to be universally disallowed from being present during duels, which mainly came about in the 3rd century after one or two especially egregious cases of duel interference. (Notably, it’s not actually illegal by Imperial decree for shugenja to avoid being present, though most daimyo have standing orders to this effect.)

Isawa Ejuko was the Elemental Master of Water at the beginning of the 8th century. She was a romantic who loved to see people marry their soulmates, and swore a vow to Benten to perform marriage ceremonies for any star-crossed lovers who asked it of her. Ejuko performed such a marriage ceremony for her friend Kakita Konishiko to her friend's lover Kakita Torikago.  Konishiko was already betrothed to a man named Doji Reju, so a challenge was issued by Reju to duel Torikago to the death.

An Imperial magistrate ordered that the challenge must be answered, and that the duel would be fought to the death, so that the winner would be free to marry (or stay married) to Ejuko’s friend Konishiko. The magistrate ordered that the matter would be decided by duel “once and for all” on a certain date on which the duel would take place.

Ejuko called upon the water kami and created a torrential rain on that day, preventing any possibility of a duel to occur. When questioned, she declared that the kami themselves were angered by the efforts to separate this husband and wife, though it seemed clear that she herself had provoked this anger and that the kami were angry as as result of her request as the Master of Water that they show their anger.

Ejuko was ordered back to Phoenix lands so that she could no longer interfere with the duel, which was allowed to go forward. She was not punished, though she was admonished for having interfered with a valid duel, and it was made clear that even the Master of Water would have suffered the displeasure of the Emperor had she interfered with a duel already in progress.

Fun fact: if not for having been ordered back to Phoenix lands as a result of this ruling, Ejuko would not have been in the right place to marry Mirumoto Asijin to his true love Isawa Maroko. This was yet another case of Ejuko performing a marriage for someone already betrothed, which led to Akodo Yokutsu leading an army north in retaliation, resulting in the Battle of the Tonbo Plains, which resulting in the creation of the Dragonfly minor clan.

This shows the ways in which the elemental kami are held in high regard, and yet the ability of shugenja to influence them means that their apparent wishes cannot necessarily be weighted as heavily as the will of e.g. the fortunes.





GAIJIN:

Now that we've talked about Rokugan, let's talk about gaijin cultures.

One of my previous campaigns dealt with gaijin a lot, and one challenge that I faced is that Rokugan has a well-defined cosmology, which is partially based on some Chinese and Japanese religions, but if I want to incorporate other mythologies, then they are extremely likely to conflict with our existing established principles.  And not just in some of the ways we've discussed, where a single point of difference can form an interesting mystery, but in terms of totally contradicting the entire worldview.

For example, I would never introduce a gaijin nation which practiced some fantasy version of Christianity into my setting, because the cosmology of Christianity is fundamentally incompatible with what we've established for Rokugan.

Some other polytheistic practices could be adapted to work for this setting.  For example, the religion of the Roman Empire wouldn't totally fit with what we've established, but it could be adapted and changed into a fantasy version without fundamentally throwing the whole thing out.  For example, some of their gods could be their names for the Fortunes, and individual pieces of their mythology which directly contradict established doctrine could simply be dismissed as the foolish ignorance of uneducated gaijin.  And there are interesting ideas to be had - the Legionnaire's Oath we discussed earlier is inspired by the Roman legionnaire's oath from actual historical records.

In my previous campaign I tried to take on this challenge.  The Moto were trying to rally "the northern tribes" under their banner.  While some claimed that this constituted a gaijin army, others pointed out that if properly done these northerners would stop being gaijin after they swore fealty to the Moto and began paying Imperial taxes.  The northern tribe called the "Uru" rebelled against the Moto, which led to Gaheris conducting an extensive military campaign against them.

Ide diplomats had previously spread some proper religious doctrine to the Uru, such that the Uru already recognized the divinity of the Hantei. However, the particulars seem to have gotten somewhat lost in translation.  Here are some things which the PCs in the previous campaign learned about the Uru religion:

→ Lord Moon and Lady Sun are known as “those who came before”. They gave birth to the “gen”, who are the elemental kami of Air, Earth, Fire, and Water.

→ The elemental kami themselves gave birth to the plants and animals of the world, as well as to “all the races of humans and other creatures”.

→ “Those who came before” also gave birth to the Hantei, who is the youngest and most favored of their children. As the golden child of the sun and moon, he has dominion over all of the gen. “Sahir” (the Salaam word for shugenja which is apparently also the Uru word for shugenja) have a lesser control and can only call upon local gen to do their bidding. “Hantei neez Onder ilg Onder ilg Onder” – Karluk says that Hantei is the khan of khan of khans.

→ The Uru recognize many of the fortunes, all of them by different names.

→ The Uru have no knowledge of the Five Elemental Dragons who are the incarnate divinities of the elements. They do recognize gods of the 4 material elements, but don’t understand that they are dragons, and also do not understand how they are different from the fortunes.

→ The gen (elemental kami) gave birth to horses long after the human race. The first horses were seen as ugly demons, but a human named Uru was unafraid of them and recognized them as beautiful angels. He befriended the first horses and learned to ride them, which is why the Uru are the first and greatest riders of horses among all the peoples of the world. The word “Uru” literally means “horse rider”.

It's challenging to adapt different religious traditions into the same setting, but I tried to do some combination of embracing a certain level of ambiguity, while also offering a framework by which these conflicting religious traditions can be understood.  Obviously their account of how different parts of the world was created is different from what we have established in Rokugan's history of the world, but there shouldn't be any irreconcilable differences in the cosmology of the Uru people as compared to the cosmology of Rokugan.

One of the PCs in that campaign asked the Uru what they know of the Moto.  Here's a bit of background about the Moto and the Unicorn clan which is relevant to this question.

Many sloppy histories record the Unicorn clan as “leaving” Rokugan ~100 years after the Empire was founded, and “returning” about 200 years ago, thus being “gone” for about 800 years.

This is a gross oversimplification, though many plays and "pillow books" take liberties with the actual history in order to create more dramatic scenes of the Unicorn clan being completely absent from their lands prior to returning all at once.

What is true is that the Unicorn clan shifted the bulk of its forces considerably to the west and Shinjo’s children conquored the city of Medinat al Salaam, renaming it to Medin al Salaat. Some early historians have suggested that this was a mistake on the part of the largely illiterate early Unicorn clan, though its unclear what led them to this conclusion.

Regardless, ruling this city state and reaping the benefits were far better than overseeing the largely meager farmland of most of Unicorn lands. Thus, the Unicorn shifted the bulk of their forces to this end of their holdings. This led to the Dragon, Lion, Scorpion, and Crab clans all pushing into Unicorn territory which was granted to them by their Clan Charter. The Unicorn also didn’t have sufficient members in Otosan Uchi to have representation in the Imperial Chancellary when it was eventually formed under Emperor Hantei the 10th.

After ruling Medin al Salaat for ~700 years, trade with gaijin lands was banned, which considerably weakened the Unicorn regime. As another language-related notes on the names of things, “ki-rin” is the word for “Unicorn” in both the Moto and Salaam languages ("Salaam" is the most common language spoken in Medin al Salaat). The “Ki Rin Trail” is literally the “Unicorn trail”, because it was heavily used prior to the banning of gaijin trade.

This contributed to the Unicorn losing power a century later, being pushed out by the Khadi-backed caliph, who unified the factions of the city in a way never done before to drive out the Unicorn clan.

The Unicorn proceeded to actually “leave” the city en masse and returned in force to their ancestral lands, where they declared war on the Dragon, Lion, Scorpion, and Crab clans.

→ The Dragon almost immediately negotiated a peace treaty which involved Mirumoto Januko giving up almost (but not quite) all of the land they had taken over the centuries in exchange for the Unicorn permanently giving up all claim to the Ryusei domain.

→ The Scorpion suffered an early defeat and gave up all claims to all Unicorn lands immediately, though they proceeded to support the Cran and Lion war efforts, possibly out of spite.

→ The Crab fought for some time and were driven back but managed to hold the entire Shinomen forest, denying the Unicorn any access to it.

→ The Lion clan was eventually driven back to their original border of the Drowned Merchant River, though they fought the longest and got considerably more concessions from the Unicorn clan as part of the peace treaty.

When the Unicorn returned, one of the families they brought back with them was the Moto family, which settled into modern Moto lands to the west of the Twilight Mountains.  Many claimed that the Moto are simply gaijin who swore fealty to the Unicorn clan in Medin al Salaat, and that the Unicorn effectively brought back an army of barbarians with them.

The Moto who came with the Unicorn claim that they were originally from modern Moto lands, and settled into the pasturelands to the southwest of Medin al Salaat after following Shinjo west across the Burning Sands Desert.  The Moto family of the Unicorn refer to the Moto who still live there as "those who remained", and they refer to themselves as "those who returned".

However, "those who remained" contend that this is wrong, and that the Moto are originally from the southwest pasturelands of Medin al Salaat, and while they do refer to themselves as "those who remained", they refer to the Moto who still swear fealty to the Unicorn lands as "those who departed", and consider them distant cousins who have settled into other lands.

One of the PCs in a previous campaign, Kitsuki Tetsu, became the Moto Minister of Justice.  Although he did not swear fealty to Moto Gaheris, he was still permitted to occupy such a high position in part due to the vows he swore.  Gaheris is a deeply religious man who respects men who swear vows to the fortunes, so as daimyo he was comfortable with a man such as Tetsu being placed in this kind of position of authority - though many of Gaheris' retainers resented Tetsu for this!

Aa the Moto began to enjoy military success against the Uru, Tetsu began to recruit Uru "daotai", who are basically the Uru equivalent of magistrates, to serve under him and administer the law during wartime.  One of these was "Kirghiz Bashi", a much-respected daotai known throughout Uru lands for his honesty and courage.

Here is what Bashi wrote to Tetsu when asked to compose a report on the Moto:

To His Excellency Kitsuki Tetsu,

You have asked about the Moto, but there are two Moto peoples on the two sides of the western desert. Each of them claim to live in their ancestral homeland, but it is the Moto who ride under the banner of Moto Gaheris who are correct, and those who live to the southwest of Medinat al Salaam have been deceived by false histories and doctrines.

You might ask how I can draw such a strong conclusion, when each group of Moto are unable to present a convincing case. The Moto are a secretive people, who keep hidden their laws and histories, and thus most Moto do not know how men came to ride horses. By examining this history, we can locate the true ancestral homeland of the Moto people, despite the histories of the Uru people having very little information about the Moto.

I don’t know how much knowledge of history you possess, so I will present the relevant facts as if I were arguing a case before you, rather than relying on an assumption of shared knowledge. The sahir Rena is the foremost authority on these histories, and if she becomes available for your consultation she can relied upon to answer any questions about the gods and their relationship to humans.

Before humankind existed, there was the creator Tenri, who always was and always will be. Tenri’s first creation was Erlikonder, with whom he partnered when creating heaven and earth. Tenri created Gunahn, who you know as Amaterasu, or Lady Sun, who embodies warmth, and whose rays Tenri used in the creation of the earth. Erlikonder created Aybaba, who you know as Onnotangu, or Lord Moon, who embodies coldness. Without this mixture, those who came before could not have created the gen, who you know as the “kami”, who themselves gave birth to the plants and animals of the world and to all the races of humans and other creatures. This tempering was also required for the sun and moon to give birth to the Hantei to rule over the gen, for without a precise mixture of the heavenly forces of warmth and cold, no god could ever assume physical form on earth.

Erlikonder became prideful after seeing the success of his work, and so Tenri created another place for him, from which he could banished from heaven. Erlikonder was arrogant but not unfair, so Tenri created the underworld and placed him in charge of judging the souls of the dead. Not being content with having so little control over the world above, Erlikonder created Kurmez, who had the power to send souls back into the world as spirits. I understand that captured Uru warriors who are released by the Moto must first swear oaths by Erlikonder and Kurmez using their Moto names King Yan and Wei Tin, as well as swearing by two other gods of the underworld of which I am not familiar. This is not surprising, as the Moto people of ages past are known to have worshiped Erlikonder and the other gods of the underworld, especially Kurmez through whose subordinate spirits human worship is solicited.

Because Erlikonder was banished to the underworld, the influence of Gunahn was stronger than that of Aybaba among the gen and gods of the world. Amaz, the god of fire, had more control over the world, which was upsetting to Sakha, the goddess of water. At this time, the Altin (“gold”) mountains to the east had a high golden peak, for which the Altin mountain range was named, and this peak connected heaven and earth. Sakha climbed the Altin peak to reach heaven and petitioned Tenri for balance.

Tenri granted her request, and allowed her to pour water down the mountain until balance was reached. Sakha poured so much water that it eroded the Altin mountain peak down into the Valley of the Lost Mountain, which the Moto rode through at the beginning of their invasion. This water spread out to the east and west, populating many lakes and rivers, with most of it flowing into what became two oceans. The ocean of the west separated our people from the lands to the west, and you surely know of the ocean to the east, which lies next to the city of the Hantei.

After this balance was brought to the world, the gen were able to give birth to new creatures. Some of them were monsterous and terrifying, such as the ogres of the south and the Vodyanoy of the north. One of these creatures was the horse, which most men fled from as herds of these terrifying monsters trampled their crops and scattered their flocks. It was our ancestor Uru who tamed the first horse and recognized the beauty of its majestic strength. Uru sold his tame horses to all of the peoples he could reach, to the Kozakthay in the north, to the Ki Rin in the east, and to the tribes of the south.

This new balance caused Gunahn and Aybaba to quarrel, and Erlikonder called upon old affections to turn his son Aybaba against his wife. Kurmez created a prison underneath the western ocean and with Aybaba’s help, Gunahn was trapped there, guarded by the spirit minions of Kurmez. Amaz, the god of fire, worried about the lack of light and heat on the world, and so gifted a golden mirror to a man named Ali from Medinat al Salaam. The mirror showed Ali how to reach the prison and distracted its spirit guardians, allowing him to break the seal which bound Gunahn to the prison. Gunahn boiled the western ocean into nothing but burning sands as she ascended back into heaven.

With the ocean now having become a desert, the Ki Rin were able to move west, using the horses sold to their ancestors by Uru to conquer the city of Medinat al Salaam. When the Ki Rin were eventually driven out, most of the Moto returned, with some staying behind, having forgotten their ancestral homeland next to the Altin mountains.

You see, we can be confident that the Moto of the south are the original Moto, and those who remained by Medinat al Salaam are settlers, because horses were birthed by the gen after the western ocean was poured to earth by Sakha. Indeed, examine the horses ridden by the Moto of the east and the Moto of the west and you will find they are of similar breeding, from the stock of the horses sold by Uru himself to the tribes of the south.

Thus, it is clear that the tribe of Gaheris is correct in its claim that theirs is the true homeland of the Moto people. They must have ridden west with the Ki Rin, leaving behind only scattered and sparsely populated tribes. Indeed, Uru histories to confirm that the Ki Rin, when they ruled the city of Medinat al Salaam, would conscript the men of the south to serve in their armies in the west. It was well known to the Uru that we should not raid the tribes of the south in the lands now ruled by Gaheris, for this would evoke the ire of the Ki Rin, who would send armies or assassins or kadibaba or all three against those who might dare to conduct such raids.

I hope this report is satisfactory, as it should answer the question of the Moto homeland. I am not generally knowledgeable about the Moto or the Ki Rin, but if you have other particular questions I can find those who are and discern the correct answers for you as I have done here.

Daotai Kirghiz Bashi
Magistrate under Kitsuki Tetsi, the Minister of Justice of the Moto clan

Note that Bashi incorrectly refers to the Moto as a "clan" rather than a family of the Unicorn clan.  Apparently the northern tribes consider the Moto to be allies of the Unicorn rather than vassals of them.  Considering how fiercely independent the Moto are and how much they hew to their own ways, this isn't an entirely unreasonably assessment!

Regardless, readers should note the similarities this account has with Rokugani religion and also the differences.  In particular, "Tenri" is not a figure which we had previously established in Rokugani religion, though it's certainly possible that such a figure could exist.  Some of the characters are recognizable and could be mapped onto Rokugani deities, and other events don't match anything in Rokugan's history, but since many of these events take place before the dawn of the Empire, it's entirely possible that Rokugan's history is incomplete and the Uru history is correct. Or perhaps their story is simply wrong, and is an invention of their storytellers, or perhaps some of it is wrong and other bits are accurate.

In the interest of discussing different gaijin religions, here are some notes I wrote about the city, culture, and religion of Medin al Salaat.  Note that I say some things about the fictional language of Salaam in my notes, which is loosely inspired by a combination of historical things and real language facts as well as just stuff I made up because it seemed interesting.  I also drew heavily on the Legend of the Burning Sands material when creating writeups of the city and its factions.

Medin al Salaat is the closest gaijin city to the empire of Rokugan. It is the center of a city-state, which the gaijin refer to as a “caliphate”.

The first part of the name “Medin al Salaat” comes from a word with several related words and meanings:

→ The "medina" is the golden gaijin coin which is the official currency of that city-state.

→ The related word "medin" literally means “value”.

→ The related word "medinat" means “price”, and refers specifically to something which is paid, given up, or sacrificed. While most commonly used in financial terms, one who wanted to threaten another might refer to “the price of crossing me”, which would also use the word "medinat".

Salaam is the name of the gaijin language most commonly spoken in Medin al Salaat. However, the word "salaam" has multiple meanings and related words:

→ Salaam is the name of the language most commonly spoken in the Burning Sands, as well as the general word for “speech” or “speaking”. The conjugation is the same in in both uses, though contextually the meaning is different.

→ It’s also used as a greeting, especially for strangers. The most common way to greet a stranger in Rokugan is to ask, “Have you eaten?” Whereas in this most common gaijin greeting, saying “Salaam!” which conveys “let us speak together!”.

→ Because of this usage, it also conveys peacefulness, and is also their word for “peace”. Thus, as a greeting this seems to mean, “let us speak peacefully together rather than fight”. Historical records of the Hidden Way indicate that this greeting conveys a binding promise not to initiate any fighting – sort of a “we come in peace and will not attack you because we only want to talk”.

→ The Salaam language does not have different words for fighting, battles, or war – all three concepts use the same word (“senpet”). Thus, the gaijin mentality (at least for these particular gaijin) is that one is either in a state of being able to speak with someone (salaam) or fighting them (senpet). It’s unclear whether this is literally true – in Rokugan there are emissaries and meetings during wartime between enemies, so people are capable of speaking while at war with one another. The uncivilized gaijin may be incapable of this, either because of their barbaric temperament or because they lack the organizational capacity, traditions, and Imperial enforcement of laws/norms that make such meetings possible. Or perhaps this is a metaphor and not literally true.

→ The word "salaat" is related to the word salaam, and means “prayer”.

Putting this all together, the name Medin al Salaat literally means “the value of prayer”. Under the rule of the Unicorn clan, this was a sign of their devotion to the fortunes and the benevolence of heaven. Under the current rulers whose Khadi allies practice maho openly, it may have a degrading tone, possibly implying that prayer has no value. This would be in line with other known gaijin sayings, e.g. the infamous and often-repeated motto “Rich men, poor men, wise men, foolish men, good men, evil men – without water, they are all dead men.”

However, the city originally had a different name, Medinat al Salaam. Putting together what’s listed above, this name means “the price of speech” or possibly “the price of peace”.

Records from the early days of the Empire are poor, and Hantei Kajimitsu’s “History of Early Rokugan” speaks little of gaijin lands. He does refer to “the city of Medin al Salaat”, which is the earliest reference to the city. However, historians have found copies of documents whose originals are said to be even older, which indicate that prior to Shinjo’s children conquoring the city it was known as “Medinat al Salaam”, and it was changed to “Medin al Salaat” by the early Unicorn clan.

I realize that much of what I've written above doesn't actually fit with real-life languages, even though it draws a little from it.  "Salaam" is a real word, but my various meanings and implications and conjugations are mostly invented for this fictional setting.  I hope this was nevertheless clear and made sense in and of itself when disregarding real, historical languages.

Salaam is the language spoken by the Almekhem, who are the current dominent nobility of the city.  I'll start explaining details about the city's different ethnic groups, and I'll start with the Almekhem:

The “prophet” Mekhem founded the city in pre-history, during the times of the warlords prior to the dawn of the Empire. This group are known as the “of Mekhem” in Salaam – they are the original speakers of Salaam. The Almekhem were still the largest ethnic group in the city when the Unicorn left, though it’s unclear whether this is still the case today. However, Salaam continues to be the most commonly spoken language in the city, based on what the Hidden Way is told by incoming silver caravans, so presumably they are still a large force. They are mainly known today for being merchants.

Mekhem became the first Sultan and his son and grandson after him, for an unknown number of generations until Shinjo’s children arrived and took control of the city.

Local folklore holds that the city existed for many centuries before being conquored by the Unicorn, though there are no historical texts to support that, and it’s unclear whether humanity even existed at the point in time when locals claim their city may have been founded.

The Hanan Caliphate:

The city is ruled by a Caliphate. The oldest female daughter of the previous Caliph is first in the line of succession. It’s unclear why only female rulers are permitted – under the previous Sultanate the rulers were all male.

The Hanan is the name of the family who rules, and the current ruler is named Hanan Talibah.  In fact every ruler goes by this name, so presumably the current ruler is Hanan Talibah the <number>, though it's not clear to those in Rokugan where she is in the counting of the family line.  It’s also unclear whether the Hanan family was originally Almekhem or from one of the other factions or even from outside the city. However, they continue to speak Salaam and don’t have their own language, which implies they possible came from the Almekhem.

They are said to control a special type of elemental kami known as djinn, though it’s unclear whether this is true or just a folk superstition. Most shugenja doubt that the 5 elements are fundamentally different from place to place, so if djinn exist at all, they may be a type of kansen (corrupted elemental kami). However, the claim is also made that djinn will not follow a khadi (see below) because of their Shadowlands taint, and that is why the khadi are incapable of seizing control of the city themselves, and tsukai are capable of dealing with kansen, so perhaps djinn don’t even exist.

The Caliph is “The Final Arbiter of all Disputes”, though in practice most factions resolve their internal disputes without involving the caliphate, so like an Imperial magistrate who only adjudicates issues between members of different clans, the Caliphate is said to mainly handle inter-factional disputes. However, like most of the information that Rokugan has about the city, this is centuries old, so it’s unknown whether this is still the case.

Note that djinn were something that I found challenging, since they are hugely important to this gaijin setting, but are difficult to reconcile with with Rokugan's cosmology, so I tried to emphasize the ambiguity.

The Qabal of the Sahir:

“Sahir” is the Salaam word for “shugenja”. Their magic is different in that they do not have exactly the same spells, though they command the elements in similar ways, commune with the elemental kami, and their magics have similar effects. Water heals, fire harms, earth protects, and air diverts. The nemuranai (elemental-kami-infused magic items) they create are said to be similarly different-but-operating-on-similar-properties.

It’s unclear whether the Sahir are their own faction. The Qabal of the Sahir is like a "low-rent version" of the Council of Elemental Masters, as well as the name of their arcane school where all sahir train. It has a significant fortressed section of the city all to itself, and they manage their own affairs, though it’s not obvious whether “they” are an ethnicity unto themselves or if like the shigenja families of Rokugan the Qabal is mainly where the magic-wielders from all over have congregated. There is definitely a “Sahiri” language, though most or all Sahir are said to speak Salaam as well.

Note that here I have tried to keep things consistent, while still allowing for more exotic things like flying carpets.  Rokugan already has "nemuranai", so describing a flying carpet in this way seems to be a good way to reconcile these conflicting systems.  

The Ashalan:

“Ashalan” is the Salaam word for “tattooed”. The Ashalan were said to be the original farmers in the area “who dug the canals” before the city was build by the Almekhem. They are now mainly known for being merchants. It’s unclear how large they are, but when the Unicorn left they were said to be “one of the largest” factions in the city. They mainly speak their own language, though like most in the city they also speak Salaam in order to deal and trade with others.

The Rashari:

The word “rashari” in Salaam literally means “caravaner”, so the Rashari are known as traveling merchants. They speak their own language, and most Rashari don’t even speak Salaam – they have designated speakers who deal with outsiders. They are from the far west and most of their people live hundreds (or perhaps thousands) of miles from Medin al Salaat.

The Hidden Way, the smuggling syndicate which trades silver for silk and porcelean, has dealt with many Rashari caravans over the centuries which come in along the Ki Rin trail across the desert. Currently one of the recurring caravans is led by “Rajko”, who is a Rashari. He has no close relatives in the city, though has said that there are many living there who are “cousins of my cousins”, though this seems to imply a “more distant than just a 2nd cousin” relation.

The Khayal:

Known as the Desert Jackals (“Khayal” is the Salaam word for “jackal”), the Khayal are perhaps the only faction more known for being farmers than merchants. They live mainly outside the city and farm whatever land is arable.

The Nizari:

“Nizari” is the Salaam word for “assassin”, and this reputation is said to be well-earned, as any who cross them will discover. Unlike the Desert Jackals, the Assassins live both inside and outside the city walls, and are said to practice their own form of shadow magic. Some have recently wondered whether they are aligned with Lord Moon, based on some similarities to moon cultist powers. In particular, they are said to know of the location of a cave outside the city which contains a portal to yomi, the realm of the honored dead, and their acolytes are taken there to witness the glory which awaits them if they remain true to their honored elders.

Despite their name and reputation, the Nizari are interacted with mainly as farmers and merchants.

The Houses of Dahab:

The word “dahab” in Salaam literally means “merchant”, so more than any other faction the Dahab are known for being merchants.

You may have noticed that a majority of factions are “known for being merchants”. This has been commented on by Rokugani historians of gaijin lands. Some have wondered who is buying all of the goods being sold – since merchants don’t produce anything but merely buy and sell, it’s difficult to understand how an entire city can have what sounds like a majority of its population working as merchants.

Regardless, the Dahab are divided into different merchant houses, though all of them share a common language. However, as merchants they universally speak Salaam, since no merchant “worth his water” would be incapable of speaking the city’s trade language.

The Moto:

Known to the “real” Moto as “those who remained”, there are indeed nomadic, pastoralist, horse-riding peoples distantly related to those who currently live in Moto lands. They are said to still speak the Moto language there – although there are no recent attestations to this effect, it seems reasonable since there’s little that would have changed this. They are said to live to the southwest of the city.

It’s unclear to historians whether current Moto lands are the original ancestral lands of the Moto, or if they’re originally from the plains on the other side of the Burning Sands desert where this group of “Moto” live. Regardless, these people live the Moto lifestyle within riding distance (i.e. within a few hundred miles) of Medin al Salaat, and they come to the city to trade, though they are said to use "Argoki" (a rudimentary sign language used for trading) more commonly than they speak Salaam.

Note that one theme in these writeups is that I tried to take existing historical myths and stories whose underpinnings might not be directly applicable to Rokugan, such as the Assassin's habit of taking people to Paradise, and adapt those stories to fit within Rokugan's cosmology.

The PCs never actually visited the city in person during this past campaign, but they did end up there as part of a "dream quest".  I sometimes like to have adventures take place in the Realm of Dreams, in which the PCs enter a shared dream where they must overcome obstacles to gain some information or achieve some other goal.

Here was the description I wrote for this particular dream quest:

The PCs find themselves standing on the Moto steppes, between the Twilight mountains and the Burning Sands Desert.
They can see both of these things as clearly as if they were next to them but can also see the distances between them.
The rock seat at Chai Sedo is said to be a scale on the Earth Dragon's head, but you can see clearly now that the
north and south sides of the Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands appear as arms, and as the sky above presses
down, and the weight of the air threatens to crush the world beneath it, the arms of the Earth Dragon hold up the sky.
You also see the Burning Sands desert, not as a stretch of land, but as a barrier, not between places but between worlds,
a shimmering veil separating one world from another.

To be clear, these things look to you as they have always looked, but you are seeing now with eyes unclouded, and you can see
that they have always looked this way, because this is what they have always been.

You then feel the world move around you.  Or perhaps you are moving.  It's impossible to tell, because distance and
movement are illusions.  But the veil passes around you, and you find yourself outside Medin al Salaat.  The city-state
is warded above and below by jinn.  Earth jinn protect the land from the underworld below, water jinn guard the streams
and canals, air jinn maintain a raging hurricane in the air above, and fire jinn have constructed a wall of fire around
the outskirts of the lands surrounding the city.  You would be completely unable to enter here normally, even in a dream... except that you are being led by an honored ancestor.  And while the Earth jinn despise nothing more than the essence
of Jigoku and would annihilate any oni or ghost or shinigami or mujina, they have been specifically instructed to permit
ancestor spirits from Yomi safe passage, and so you are safely led past the dangers.  Interestingly, your yomi guides
are not your own ancestors, but rather those who have been sent to guide you here.

You find yourself outside the legendary walls of Medin al Salaat.  The walls were were built to protect from Moto raids,
and they seem to tower up to the heavens.  The truth you seek is inside the city, but you will need to make your way inside.
Fortunately, you'll have help!  There are Moto here.  Not the Moto who ride with Gaheris, but the "Moto who remained", the
Moto who live to the southeast of Medin al Salaat.

That was the description I wrote to introduce the PCs to the shared dream they found themselves in.  While outside the city, they were able to interact with the various factions, learning secrets which would be difficult to discover in the waking world, and coming to better understand these factions.  This understanding and these secrets are not the primary purpose of the dream quest, but rather are a sort of "side mission", where if the PCs want to brave the dangers of lingering too long in this dream, they can gain additional rewards in the form of knowledge and wisdom.

The major challenge of that initial scene was to manage to breach the walls of the city to win their way inside.  Once they did, they found themselves in the Court of the Caliph, witnessing a past event from 1 year earlier, which helps them to learn about how these events of the past led to their current circumstances.  Here was the introduction I wrote to that second scene, which I am including here for future context, in case we later end up discussing how real-life things can appear in dreams.

The Uru have arrived in Medin al Salaat, to meet with Caliph Hanan Talibah in the Uru month known as "the reaping",
and the Uru have come to the city state to seek counsel and support against the Moto.  Timur
Beg, the leader of the Uru, has arrived with "onder" (khan) Eguden Yeke and onder Perhat Bugra.  Beg introduces himself to
the Caliph's court by his many titles, as the "Uru onder" (khan of the Uru), as the "Onder ilg Onder" (khan of khans), as the
"Genel Ordular ilg Uru Kabeel" (general of the armies of the Uru clan), and most importantly by the title granted to his grandfather
by the Caliph's grandmother, the "Alhukm Alniha ilg Almunazaat" (unlike the other titles, this one is in Salaam rather than Uru and means "the final arbitur of all disputes").

In the Caliph's court are the most esteemed of the factions.  The most numerous are the
noble families of the Almekhem, who ruled the city under the Sultunate before the Ki Rin
conquered the city and who now once again administer holdings under the Caliph.  However,
in this dream they are faceless masses, just as the Moto families were who helped your raids
and acted as your bodyguards.  Here you discern that the individual Almekhem matter little,
for whatever their noble blood they serve at the pleasure of the Caliph and act as extensions
of her will.

The khadi are also present - in particular two senior khadi, each of the with an apprentice.
One of the senior khadi is the Caliph's grand vizier, and the other is her slave.  Each khadi
carries an obsidian sword, and other than the Caliphs personal guard they are the only ones
permitted to carry such weapons in the Caliph's court.  The faces of all 4 of the khadi cannot
be seen, because none of them are in possession of their own names.  Instead you see different
faces cycle back and forth.  On the vizier and the slave, the faces shift so quickly that your
eyes cannot focus on them for even an instant, whereas on their apprentices faces linger for
many seconds before cycling between a smaller number of the faces of those whose names they
have taken.

The Nizari are also present - while as you've already seen their population lives mainly
outside the city, they also have emissaries here. Their leader, who represents them here,
is the Old Man of the Mountain.

The Qabal of the Sahir are present - Hakhim of the Firmament, Kaleel the Stormwind, and Shilah
the Flame.  Their colleague, the keeper of the oasis, is not present.

Finally, the Houses of Dahab are represented, primarily by their spokesperson Menjari,
who brings all disputes on behalf of the Dahab to the Caliph.

Eguden Yeke translates for the Uru, as he apparently speaks Salaam.  After the Uru present
themselves to the Caliph's court, they retire to a private counsel.  The Caliph Hanan Talibah,
who rules the city, is present with her advisors.  In particular she has invited the Old Man
of the Mountain, who leads the Nizari, as well the several khadi, to advise her in this meeting.

That was the second scene of the dream quest.  Here there were deeper secrets to be learned, and I have a separate rules system for dream quests which is used to determine how successful the PCs are and how damaging this can be.





THE MOTO:

Now that we've discussed gaijin, let's discuss the Moto.

One of my past campaigns involved the Moto family of the Unicorn clan, which are loosely based on the peoples of Mongolia (in the same way that Rokugan is based on Japan and partially Imperial China).

Moto etiquette:

Moto culture is much less cultured and reserved than Rokugan. In the civilized world, people would be shocked and appauled at an exchange like this:

→ “Well, given that (statement with potentially demeaning implications), perhaps—”

→ “What did you just say to me?! I am <refutation>, and if you intend to insult me, we should get off our horses and settle this like men!”

→ “I didn’t say anything of the sort – are you an old man whose hearing is failing? I can speak loudly if it helps your frail ears.”

→ “Just guard your tongue more carefully, or you may force me to cut it out!”

→ “Pfaw! I’d enjoy seeing you try. But as I was saying…”

But that would be totally normal in Moto culture.

This can create awkward situations for people, especially those with Short or Long Temper. With that being said, even if you answer insults immediately, that doesn’t necessarily clash with Friend of the Clans, since rising to the provocation is one of the possible expected outcomes. However, responding by escalating to violence or offering/threatening violence as a resolution to the insult makes you more likely to get into random face-saving brawls.

However, the rule of thumb is that so long as you’re willing to sit down and eat and drink with them afterwards, brawling with someone who has insulted you doesn’t ruin your reputation/standing/relationship with them. It may even improve it!

Moto tribal structure:

The Moto mainly live in nomadic extended-family groups. An individual group ranges from several dozen to a several hundred. Individual families within the group have their own brands, which they use to mark their horses and cattle. (Sheep are often marked with ink on their wool.)

A “clan” consists of a collection of these extended family groups, “led” by a khan. The khan is responsible for settling disputes and meting out justice within the clan, and leads the clan in war. A clan usually has a total population in the low thousands, though some smaller clans may consist of only one or two extended family groups and number no more than a few hundred in total.

Because the word “clan” already has a defined meaning in the Empire, the civilized world refers to the Moto clans as “tribes”, whereas they refer to themselves as “clans”. The PCs are savvy enough to be assumed to be using the correct terms in the correct company, and the GM will specifically explain if there’s ever a situation where there’s not a single expected usage, letting the PCs decide which people to upset if necessary.

The Moto daimyo:

The “Moto clan” (or “Moto tribe”) is the “ruling” tribe of the Moto. The word “Moto” literally means “human”, so they are the “Human clan” in their language. The khan of the Moto tribe is always officially the daimyo of the Moto family according to both the Imperial and Unicorn clan governments.

The Moto daimyo is sometimes “just” the khan of the local Moto clan. This is the largest and wealthiest of the Moto families, so the Moto khan is a significant figure even in the worst of times, when other Moto clans don’t care much for his opinion. Unlike most other families in the Empire, the Moto daimyo is always male.

Moto Gaheris is the most successful Moto khan in centuries (maybe ever), having unified the clans to all ride under his banner and call him “the khan of khans”

Even when there is no “khan of khans”, groups of khans will sometimes come together to make collective decisions or resolve disputes between different clans. I really wish this meeting was called a “khanclave” but the Moto word for it is “khuraldai”.

Imperial official documents refer to “khuraldai” as the Moto word for “chancellary”, which is not entirely wrong, since that’s probably the closest analog for the concept. However, because Moto society is so differently structured, an uninformed person who hears “Moto chancellary” would get entirely the wrong idea.

Moto law:

The Moto word for “law” is Yassa, which actually means “secret writings”. This is because their legal code is deliberately secret. Only a khan and his designated advisors are permitted to read the legal code, to prevent the letter of the law from being used to abuse the spirit of the law.

Legal decisions handed down by a khan will sometimes have their rationale broadly explained to promote public virtue, but rulings do not create legal precedent and there is no common law system. That idea has been rejected for the same reason the laws are kept secret – otherwise the educated could abuse the system.

Language:

Our maps separate Moto lands into “eastern” and “western” halves, which basically means “do the local tribes speak Rokugani or do they only speak Moto?”

Eastern Moto are mostly bilingual because Rokugani has been the official language in the Empire for so long and the most successful Moto have needed to be able to communicate with the Unicorn clan (and sometimes Imperials) for centuries. It’s unclear whether most eastern Moto are bilingual or if it’s just the wealthier and more successful ones.

Approaching a Moto tribe:

The PCs may occasionally want to approach a Moto tribe to speak with their leader. Here’s what that usually looks like.

→ PCs approach and indicate they want to speak to the khan to whomever they encounter first. This may just be a few shepherds, or at most one of the large family units which is likely not going to be the khan’s family unit.

→ A large force rides up containing most of the men of that subfamily. The PCs will typically be outnumbered here even if they’ve brought multiple platoons as they do on caravan exchanges.

→ The PCs roll etiquette, with the usual 50% taken off the top. (This is where Friend of the Clans is the most helpful.)

→ The Moto ask what tribute they are due. The larger the group, the greater the tribute, as opposed to being based on Rank. This means that the more backup the PCs bring, the more tribute they are expected to provide.

→ The Moto will sometimes ask for something specific, e.g. some nice-looking horses or some clothes/jewelry someone is wearing, etc. They will never ask for weapons, since that is universally regarded as a prelude to violence. If anyone ever does demand a sword, they are telling you they intend to kill you if you don’t leave.

→ Depending on how well things go, the PCs will either be taken to the khan, or they will need to prove themselves in some way. Because of the aggressive and insulting style of Moto communcation it would not be uncommon to need to engage in some form of physical competition prior to being taken to the khan, either brawling with them or engaging in a wrestling match or a feat of horsemanship or an archery contest, etc.

Moto Lands:

On paper the Moto are only 1 giant domain approximately 400 miles wide and 250 miles deep.

Shiro Moto is the official name for their capital city, which is built next to a lake. It’s more of a fortress/monastery/town than a proper city, and the Moto call it Karakoru, which was originally the name of the shrine the city was built around. It’s about 75 miles northwest of Chai Sedo, putting it in the eastern part of Moto lands.

Because Moto lands are semi-arid, only about 1% of their land is suitable for farming. Because Imperial taxes are assessed based on agricultural yield, the Moto pay very little in taxes. Their population is also quite sparse for the same reason – the entire area was thought to have only around 100,000 humans living there, though the number turns out to probably be somewhat higher than that.

The Moto are mainly pastoralists, consisting of many nomadic tribes. On paper those tribes are ruled by local governors, which the Moto call Khans, though even the Shinjo usually don’t know how many tribes there are or much about their makeup and numbers.

The western Moto in particular rarely pay tribute to the ruling Moto family, but evidently Moto Gaheris sufficiently impressed and unified them that all of the tribes answered his call towards the end of the Lion/IUnicorn war.

The Moto pay their taxes mainly in horses – the Imperial Magistrate collects 1000 horses per year, since the “blue book” value of a horse is considered 2 koku (despite horses being considerably cheaper in Moto lands). This is the main external source of horses (i.e. the main source other than breeding) for the Imperial legions – any company can send people to Shiro Moto to pick up horses as needed. See Horse cultures for more information on this.

The previous Imperial magistrate for Moto lands (Seppun Ritsuno) did what most people in her position have done and spent most of her time at Chai Sedo with the 1st Imperial Legion, leaving her work to her yoriki assistants at Shiro Moto. She was recently replaced by Seppun Kiyohito, who spends most of his time at the captial to learn more of the Moto and their numbers.

The Burning Sands desert marks the western and southern borders of Moto lands, with the Vindicator Moto being the southernmost tribe.

Interestingly, there are suddenly a lot more wealthy Moto than ever before, both because of their recent raids on Lion lands and because of the Emperors material suppot of Moto Gaheris.

The Vindicator Moto:

The Burning Sands desert surrounds Moto lands on its western and southern borders. The Shadowlands Taint is transmitted through water, and the Burning Sands desert therefore forms a barrier against the Shadowlands.

The Vindicator Moto have sworn religious vows to oppose the Shadowlands, and they seek and destroy any Shadowlands creatures which make their way this far north through the mountains. They are the sworn enemies of the Dark Moto.

They are mainly a normal nomadic tribe (like most Moto), but their holy place is Bodi Kaikhan, a shrine consecrated to Emma-O, the Fortune of Death. In addition to being a holy place of the Moto, it is also a pilgrimage destination for members of The Order of Peaceful Repose, a sect of the Brotherhood of Shinsei. This order is rooted in pre-Imperial funerary traditions, formed by priests who developed methods of pacifying or banishing the spirits those who did not pass peacefully from this world.

(It has since been explained to the PCs that Bodi Kaikhan is in fact a shrine to the 4 Gods of Death rather than to Emma-O specifically.)

The Gods of Death:

Moto religious practices are often different from those of the rest of Rokugan, and one thing that the PCs encountered was that the modern Moto are in the process of bringing back "the old ways", which involves worship of the Gods of Death.  Here is some information about this.

The number 4 is unlucky because it sounds like the word “death”. Rokugani often avoid it, e.g.

→ People never depart on trips on the 4th day of the month.

→ Buildings in Rokugan are “never” 4 stories, i.e. a basement either will or won’t be counted as a floor of the building in order to make the number of floors either 3 or 5.

→ Gifts which would normally be 4 zeni/bu/koku will be supplemented with lower denomination (e.g. 4 koku and 1 bu so the gift is 5 coins) in order to avoid the unlucky number. The exception is a threat – a gift of 4 of something is considered a threat in Rokugani culture just as a gift of a weapon in considered a threat in Moto culture.

It is therefore fitting that there are 4 Gods of Death – given the significance of the number, how could there be any other number? However, of the 4 Gods of Death, only 2 are recognized in the rest of Rokugan, and the others appear unique to Moto teachings.

Moto Gaheris, the daimyo of the Moto family, who is referred to by the Moto as "the khan of khans", carries 4 swords, each dedicated to a different god of death:
→ Bloodstorm, which Gaheris carries into battle, is dedicated to Emma-O
→ Lamentation, used for defense when attacked/ambushed by another, is dedicated to Enma
→ Lightning, used in single combat, is dedicated to King Yan
→ Retirement, used in executions, is dedicated to Wei Tin

Emma-O is the fortune of death, recogized throughout the Empire since the dawn of civilization. However, there is no Grand Abbot of Emma-O, and temples to Emma-O are all in remote locations to avoid attracting the her attention in populated areas. The order of Emma-O is known as the Order of the Peaceful Repose, and specializes in pacifying upset ghosts and helping them return to Jigoku. There is at least one monastery to Emma-O in every clan, as the services of the Order of the Peaceful Repose will inevitably be required in every clan at some point.

A few well-established truths which are important to remember about the fortunes:

→ No fortune is evil, though many of them are terrifying. Death is a part of the natural order, and Emma-O is therefore an important part of the interconnectedness of all things.

→ No two fortunes are ever in opposition to one another. This can be counterintuitive, since e.g. there is a fortune of mercy (Fukurokujin) and a fortune of personal vengeance (Hofukushu). It is therefore an important teaching that if you ever find yourself understanding two fortunes in opposition to each other, then you do not understand either of them. Therefore, while Emma-O is the fortune of death, she cannot be said to exist in opposition to Jurojin, the fortune of longevity.

→ Emma-O therefore doesn’t rejoice in any specific death more than any other. An uneducated peasant might wrongly guess that Emma-O would delight in someone who dies young and prefer that people lead short lives to long lives. This is clearly not the case – if it was then there could be no fortune of longevity! (An interesting corollary is that Jurojin, the fortune of longevity, does not always prefer long lives to short ones – this is counterintuitive but still a well-established truth.)

→ Emma-O is the only one of the Gods of Death who is a fortune, and fortunes are part of the fabric of reality. Emma-O is not merely a god who happens to favor the concept of death, she literally is death. (To be more precise, she exists as the cycles and connection created by death which further shape and create death in turn.) It’s unclear whether this makes her the greatest of the Gods of Death – the Moto don’t seem to have seriously considered this question.

Interestingly, Emma-O is the only one of the Gods of Death who is a fortune, and fortunes are part of the fabric of reality. Emma-O is not merely a god who happens to favor the concept of death, she literally is death. (To be more precise, she exists as the cycles and connection created by death which further shape and create death in turn.) It’s unclear whether this makes her the greatest of the Gods of Death – the Moto don’t seem to have seriously considered this question.

One thing I have tried to emphasize about these Moto religious practices is that they will probably seem frightening to outsiders, and cause many to wonder whether the Moto are behaving in a heretical manner outside the bounds of what is considered appropriate religions practice as determined by the Imperial Ministry of Rites.

For example, let's talk about King Yan, who the Moto also worship as one of the Gods of Death.

King Yan, also known as the King of Hell, is the one who judges the souls of the dead, determining where they will spend their time in the underworld until they are reborn. There are 8 greater hells and 16 lesser hells, and a King Yan sentences souls to spend time in one of these, or several in succession. This is said to be a necessary part of the process by which souls are purified and stripped of their connections to their previous life. Thus, while souls are indeed punished in the 24 hells of Jigoku, the process of a soul having its connections eaten by oni is not inherently a punishment, as it is what allows rebirth.

King Yan will send some souls who are worthy (especially those already close to enlightenment) directly into Yomi, the realm of the honored dead. It’s unclear whether Yomi is part of Jigoku or if it is a separate realm entirely – this is much debated by scholars. King Yan doesn’t appear to have dominion over Yomi, which has no oni need for any ruler. Yomi is where honored ancestors dwell, and damned souls which have completed their time in the hells of Jigoku commune with their own ancestors in Yomi before being reincarnated.

King Yan rules over all oni, and tsukai (witches) often pray to him. There is some debate among scholars over whether or not oni are themselves inherently evil, though it is heretical to say that oni are “not malicious”. This debate has relevance when considering the worship of King Yan:

→ Oni are thought to be the mechanism by which souls are purified prior to death, as they hunger for and eat away at connections between earthly things. An oni in Jigoku could therefore be seen as performing a holy work in accordance with the Tao.

→ On the other hand, an evil being can still be directed to act according to its nature while unintentionally serving a good and noble purpose. It’s unclear whether oni understand themselves to be eating away at the souls of the dead for the benefit of those souls – if not, then they are surely evil and any good they do is incidental to their intentions.

→ Of course, many oni are themselves unintelligent – some possess no more intellect than insects, others are as smart as dogs or horses, and only the Oni Lords have a human (or perhaps super-human) level of intelligence. The question of whether oni are inherently good or evil may therefore only be relevant to Oni Lords.

→ Just as animals come in different types and have enormous variance within a single species, oni too come in many varieties. It’s therefore possible that some oni are evil and others are not, or that some types of oni are inherently evil and others vary between individual oni.

→ Oni who are summoned into the mortal realm by bloodspeakers and other types of tsukai usually try to devour everything they can, though smarter ones may scheme to more effectively feed as much as they can while in this realm. This is unquestionably bad and wrong, as the essence of Jigoku (the Shadowlands taint) they bring with them corrupts and degrades all it comes into contact with, in contravention of the natural order.

The Vindicator clan, which deals with the occasional oni which makes it way into Moto lands along the western side of the Twilight Mountains, teaches that oni in the mortal realm are not evil, and should instead be regarded like rabid animals which need to be put down. Killing such an oni allows it to “return to where it belongs” and is therefore a merciful act, not only protecting its mortal victims but ultimately doing what is best for the oni itself to where it will thrive where the Tao prospers for it. The Vindicator’s hatred for all things Shadowlands is well-known, as they are the southernmost Moto tribe who has to deal with all of the Shadowlands denizens which make their way into Moto lands. Thus, their position is treated with deference even by those who disagree with them and find it foolish.

One thing that I've tried to emphasize, in this section and in other writings, is how even within the world of Rokugan with its many established doctrines, there is active debate about these matters.  Even with something as seemingly black-and-white, good-and-evil as oni (demons) from hell (Jugoku), there is much room for theological disagreement between different characters in the setting.

The next God of Death in my notes is Enma:

Enma was thought to be the Moto word for Emma-O, i.e. until the start of the campaign the PCs thought that they referred to the same being. The Moto describe Enma as “the guardian of the gates of Jigoku”.

As a reminder, the Bon Festival occurs on the full moon of the 7th month (Obon), when families invite back the spirits of their ancestors to return to them for one day and one night. This is a time of reunification for ancestors whose souls were in Yomi; for souls damned in Jigoku, it is a brief reprieve. The gates of the underworld are opened by the power of monks, who chant the sutras of the Shinseist canon for the entire week leading up to Obon.

The Moto claim that these monks are not opening the gates directly, but that their sutras entreat Enma to open the gates herself. This assertion has never been tested by the Imperial Ministry of Rites to determine whether it is heretical, so PCs should be careful before asserting its truth themselves. There’s no need to worry about simply informing others that this is a thing the Moto believe, though this may prompt others to demand that the PCs denounce this teaching and assert its falseness.

With that being said, Enma’s job is said to not be mainly about keeping the souls of the dead in Jigoku – rather she is tasked with keeping the living out! Of all the Gods of Death, Enma is the most strongly opposed to tsukai. When an oni is slain in the mortal realm, it is Enma who reaches up and pulls the oni’s spirit back into Jigoku. Someone in Karakoru made a comparison to Ryoshun, who is the “member of Lord Moon’s heavenly court who guards the entrance to the celestial heavens”. This fits with the understanding of Enma as someone who keeps outsiders from entering rather than a warden who keeps prisoners inside.

Enma is said to keep mujina as pets, or perhaps she simply enjoys and favors them as creatures she finds delightful and beautiful. (Mujina are the trickster spirits of Jigoku in the same way that foxes and tanuki tricksters in the mortal realm.) The Moto claim that this is why mujina are the only creatures able to travel freely between the mortal realm and Jigoku.

One subtle detail I tried to include there is that because the Moto speak a different language from the rest of the Empire (though most of their educated nobles also speak Rokugani), there is a lot of room for confusion around things like the names of different gods.  Many Rokugani encountered Moto references to Enma and reasonably assumed that this was the Moto translation of Emma-O.  This raises similar questions about a lot of gaijin gods - for example, if encountering a traveler from the gaijin city of Medin al Salaat, if that gaijin refers to some god from their pantheon as The God of Love, a samurai might assume that this is another name for Benten.  And they will probably be correct, since Benten as a fortune is part of the fabric of reality and therefore omnipresent in the mortal realm, though there is room for misunderstanding and there are other possibilities as well which might not occur to the samurai and lead to confusion later.

The final God of Death is Wei Tin.

Wei Tin is called “the lord of ghosts” and has dominion over all spirits who have returned to the mortal realm prior to being reincarnated. A few notes/explanations/reminders on ghosts in general:

→ Ghosts can come from either Jigoku or Yomi, though ghosts of both types may be angry and vengeful. For example, ghosts from Yomi may haunt their own descendants if one has somehow disgraced their family, or alternatively may help an honored descendent by haunting one who has unjustly opposed them. Matsu no Moyu Kazushi is an example of someone from the 1st legion who is widely believed to be haunted by the vengeful ancestors of his enemies (though he denies this).

→ Many hauntings are not vengeful, and may be the result of damned souls from Jigoku reaching out for help and counsel. Doji no Tsume Toyohiro is an example of a member of the 1st legion who is haunted by the ghosts of his fallen comrades, with whom he frequently speaks and tries to comfort.

→ All ghosts are hungry. This is why bowls of food are left out for ghosts with chopsticks pointed in the air, especially during the Bon festival or at other times when ghosts are thought to be present. Whether a ghost is friendly or upset (or both!) feeding it will help prevent the ghost from being distracted by its hunger.

→ Many Jigoku ghosts are able to manifest in this realm because they have lingered after visiting on Obon, while others have been able to temporarily escape hell somehow. Honored ancestors from Yomi are able to visit whenever they wish and need no special dispensation to leave the underworld to visit the moral realm.

→ Wandering ghosts can be sent back to rest through other means as well – the Moto claim to have originated the practice of “death riding”, which is a well-known Unicorn practice of sending a rider into the wilderness to drink and feast with the dead. Shinjo Inoru is the death rider for the Unicorn companies of the 1st legion.

Wei Tin is the lord of all ghosts, whether from Jigoku or Yomi. He is said to be the one who grants damned souls dispensation to leave Jigoku for a time to haunt the mortal realm. Specificlaly he is said to “deal with” these souls, which may “bargain with” Wei Tin in exchange for his help.

While souls from Yomi do not require Wei Tin’s help in reaching the mortal realm, the Moto claim that they still often require assistance in finding their mortal descendants, especially those who have not been able to e.g. burn the correct type of incense which can act as a beacon to ancestors during the week of Obon. Thus, he also bargains with honored ancestors, helping alert them to the needs of their living descendants and assisting them in locating the times and places where they may most effectively intervene on their behalf.

One of the ways in which Wei Tin is said to help is by assisting in possessions. If you hear of a man who has suddenly and unexpectedly cut his own throat or drunkenly broken his neck falling off his own horse, the Moto say you can be assured that Wei Tin helped a vengeful ghost possess him at the opportune moment. Similarly, when people find themselves possessed in battle by ancestors who fight through them and for them as their strength begins to fail, Wei Tin may have helped an honored ancestor locate their descendant in the chaos of battle.

It’s unclear what exactly the souls of the dead have to offer Wei Tin in cases where they bargain with him. With this in mind, Moto who give offerings to Wei Tin do not do so directly – rather, they give offerings to their ancestor “that they may themselves pass these along to Wei Tin, the lord of ghosts”. Similarly, when the Moto slaughter a fatted calf and burn its flesh for their ancestors, they often burn extra “that their ancestors may themselves make offerings to Wei Tin”. With that being said, there seems to be an understanding that the dead are able to make further bargains with Wei Tin beyond using what the living pass along to them, and it’s unknown what those bargains entail.

Pilgrims to Bodi Kaikhan wishing to commune with the spirits of their honored ancestors pray to Wei Tin to assist them, and this is surely what Moto Gaheris must have done before swearing his vows and forging his covenant to the Gods of Death.

Moto rank:

The Moto do not award rank in the same way as the rest of the Empire. This came up briefly in a recent session, though the matter did not have to be officially adjudicated at that time.

We've already discussed the 15 ranks that samurai occupy, with the Emperor being the only person of the 15th rank, and a county magistrate being of the 5th rank, etc.

We've also established that anyone above the level of Governor from the ruling House of a Family automatically has 1 higher rank than what’s listed above. Anyone from the ruling Family of a Clan automatically has 2 higher rank instead. For example:

→ Ikoma Yuan is the Deputy Minister of War for Ikoma lands, but he is of the 10th rank, since the Ikoma Ministry of War means oversees not only the Ikoma house itself, but all of the domains of the Ikoma vassal families.

→ Shinjo Tashima, who appointed Kitsuki Tetsu as a Clan magistrate overseeing Moto lands (subordinate to Shinjo Shunichi “the sand pirate”), is the Minister of Justice for the Shinjo house, and is therefore also the Minister of Justice for the entire Unicorn clan, so he is of the 12th rank.

Moto Gaheris’ rank:

Moto Gaheris is the daimyo of the Moto family, so the rank of all of his retainers flows downhill from his own rank. But what rank is he?

→ If he were the daimyo of any other Family in the Empire, he would be automatically considered to be of the 13th rank. Most people seem to assume that is his rank, though this has never been officially determined for any Moto daimyo.

→ However, the Moto are the only Family in the Empire who don’t have a seat on the Imperial chancellary. (Even vassal houses such as the Ryusei domain have a seat on the Imperial chancellary, though the Ryusei chancellor has fewer rights and privileges than Family and Clan daimyo.) Thus, many would argue that Gaheris should be considered equivalent to a House daimyo, and thus be considered to be of the 12th rank.

→ Minor clan daimyo are either of the 12th or 13th rank, depending on the specific minor clan. Specifically, the two minor clans whose daimyo are of the 13th rank are the Mantis and the Dragonfly. These are also the only two minor clans who themselves have more than one house, i.e. who have other vassal daimyo subordinate to them.

→ The Moto family turns out to be extremely large… sort of. Moto lands contain fewer humans than an average domain – the Ryusei was a slightly-smaller-than-average domain before they conquered several Unicorn provinces, but still had probably twice the total human population of Moto lands. On the other hand, such a high percentage of Moto subjects are samurai warriors that Gaheris was able to field a samurai cavalry force 3-5 times the size of the combined samurai/peasant army of the Ryusei. Some might argue that this raises Gaheris’ weight and therefore his position in the 13th rank should therefore not be in question.

→ With that being said, Gaheris’ kuraldai is officially regarded as the Moto chancellary, the Moto “clans” are officially considered the various registered Moto lineages, and the khans of those clans are officially considered chancellors. Thus, whatever the size of the Moto, they have been legally classified as a single House, and there is standing precedent that Gaheris has no other daimyo subordinate to him. With that being said, there are a number of Family daimyo who have no vassal houses and yet are still considered to be of the 13th rank. Examples include the Kuni, the Asahina, the Yogo, and even the Kitsuki – Tetsu’s family!

Kitsuki Tetsu will be under enormous pressure not to rule that Gaheris is only of the 12th rank, and no one in the Moto expects him to do so, but it’s within his legal power to make that ruling if he so chooses!

Gaheris’ retainers:

The question of the rank of Moto Chenghiz came up, and it turns out there’s a pretty huge range as to what his rank actually might be.

Here’s the least favorable interpretation the rank of Moto Chenghiz:

→ Treat Moto Gaheris as being only of the 12th rank, since someone not recognized by the Imperial chancellary cannot possibly outrank anyone who is so recognized.

→ Gaheris has not appointed Ministers to any of the recognized six Ministries. He has official positions for people like Moto Jochi as “Chief Tribute collector”, but since this doesn’t correspond to any Ministry, these positions cannot be considered any higher than that of a Deputy Minister. He especially cannot be considered anything like a Minister of Revenue, since he is merely inventorying gifts given to Gaheris (rather than taking taxes and then passing the required amount up to Gaheris), making him a glorified clerk. This interpretation places Jochi in the 9th rank.

→ Chenghiz himself has no official title, meaning that he has no government post beyond assisting his father in the duties of his father’s office. That makes him automatically 3 ranks lower than his father, putting in squarely within the 6th rank.

Here is the most favorable interpretation of the rank of Moto Chenghiz:

→ Treat Gaheris as being of the 13th rank, because his standing can hardly be in question given his accomplishments and recognized position as daimyo of the Moto family.

→ While Gaheris may not have bothered to officially register Jochi as a Minister, he clearly regards Jochi in that way. Even if the specifics differ from any other domain and the entire structure is completely different, Jochi manages the revenue for Gaheris’ government, so he could be ruled to be considered the Moto Minister of Revenue. Alternatively Jochi could be considered the Minister of Tribute – there’s no rule saying that someone must be a member of a recognized ministry to be considered a Minister, though most people would probably say that if it’s “not good enough for the Emperor to recognize in his government in the capital then it shouldn’t be good enough to be recognized here”. (Of course, “most people” don’t think very highly of the Moto.) Regardless of the legal framework, this would place Jochi within the 11th rank,.

→ When Jochi assigned his eldest son Chenghiz to the Western Star legion, he identified Chenghiz as being “the most knowledgeable in the laws of tribute of anyone in Moto lands excepting only myself”. His son is also in charge of many other counters/recorders who inventory tribute being taken and make reports. If Jochi was willing to assert officially that his eldest son Chenghiz outranks all other tribute collectors who work under Jochi, then Chenghiz could be considered as high as a Deputy Minister, making him of the 10th rank.

So basically, Jochi can be considered anywhere between the 6th and 10th ranks, depending on how you rule on various sub-questions.

These sections emphasize the difficulties in integrating the Moto with the rest of Rokugan, both religiously and politically, due to the differences in their culture and practices.

The Moto also practice a fundamentally different kind of horse culture than the rest of Rokugan, so this section outlines first how normal (“Stable”) horse culture works and then discussed how the Moto vary from the norm.

Stable horse culture:

Horses are expensive.

More specifically, keeping horses is expensive, though the nature of the expense depends on how they are kept. Horses are large and eat a lot – if you wanted to buy grain to feed a horse it would cost 4-5 koku per year.

Of course, horses can graze if given enough land. This generally requires 2-4 acres per horse if you don’t want the horse to overgraze the area. This is an opportunity cost since such land would generally be suitable for farming – it also generally needs to be fenced in. A county magistrate usually keeps around half a dozen horses, and if they already have a fenced in area large enough to support their horses, then it costs them very little to feed the horses.

Having this kind of fenced in pasture also reduces stabling expenses. Horses need to be exercised, and a small pen next to a stables isn’t good enough if you care about the health and vigor of the horses. Depending on the size of their pasture, it generally costs 1-4 koku per year to stable a horse.

The “market value” of a horse is usually considered to be around 2 koku, though this varies wildly. Note that this means that the first year you buy a horse, you usually expect to spend significantly more on upkeep the very first year than you spent to buy the horse. Of course, this isn’t always true – a magistrate with pasture space and an opening in their stables may pay very little, though depending on their farmer population they may be indirectly paying via the opportunity cost of having that land go unfarmed.

Most domains have several hundred horses owned by the daimyo, and daimyo are frequently concerned about keeping their horse populations down because of the maintenance expenses and because of relatively low demand for horses during peacetime. Daimyo with excess horses will often give them away to village headsmen to distribute to farms for use as draft animals – such horses are often slaughtered and eaten when the need for meat outweighs the capacity of the peasants to feed those horses.

Because it’s hard to support a large population of horses, the pedigree of horses is highly valued. After all, if you’re going to spend ~8 koku per year on owning a horse anyway, it often makes sense to pay a premium for a much better breed of horse.

The best horses come from Unicorn lands, who have spent a thousand years breeding the best horses in lands which support horses much better than most of the rest of the Empire. In particular:

- The Otaku have the best heavy cavalry horses – they breed the largest horses which can support the most weight and are the best at scattering groups of infantry in battle.

- The Shinjo have the best riding horses, which are faster over long distances and better for the horse archery, which despite the dramatic nature of swordsmanship is really the true origin of the samurai class.

- The Moto have the best (and most numerous) pack horses, which are especially suited to cold climates. See below for an explanation of the Moto approach and how it differs from everything above.

Wild horse culture:

Horses grow like weeds in the Moto steppes. There’s plenty of grazing land, but not enough to keep the horses all in one place. The Moto therefore build pens and let the horses (as well as their sheep) out to graze during the day, counting on most of them to return at night. After a while, the animals will have grazed enough that they will be herded to a new area, where a different pen will be used.

This system has huge advantages – horses cost only a few bu in Moto lands, and it takes very little effort to keep them. A single family can maintain many dozens of horses this way alongside their flock of sheep.

However, it’s impossible to track the pedigree of your horses this way – you have no idea which stallions fathered which colts. Riders may have their favrite horses to ride, and some larger or more impressive horses may sell for somewhat more than others, but overall horses are mainly a commodity in this system.

There are plenty of traders who buy horses cheaply in Moto lands for only a few bu each and then transport them into the Empire where they can be sold for much more. However, while horses are to some degree self-transporting, to even spend a few months transporting them often costs more than buying them in the first place, and many may be lost or stolen along the way. And Moto horses are poorly suited to hot southern climates.

Outsider Keep uses both cultures of horse keeping – they have a pen and herdsmen who keep a herd of Moto horses outside the keep, as well as a stables inside the keep where they keep their prize Shinjo riding horses.

Hay:

Both the Moto and the rest of the Empire use a lot of hay. While the Moto primarily graze, their horses may struggle to all do enough rooting in the snow in the winter months to feed their massive herds, especially since moving from place to place is more difficult in the winter. And in the reset of the Empire, horses without grazing land rely on food such as hay to maintain their diet.

An active horse typically eats about 20 pounds of hay per day. Hay is usually sold in bulk – a ton of hay usually costs around 1 koku, and in fact in Unicorn lands the government pegs 1 koku to 1 ton of hay just as the Emperor pegs 1 koku to 40 gallons of rice. As with rice, the actual price of hay may fluctuate in the market, but for the purpose of paying rent and taxes, 1 ton is always equal to 1 koku.

1% of farmland in any Unicorn domain is required by law to be set aside specifically for hay production, and in practice the amount of hay land is somewhat higher. Otaku lands additionally have high legal requirements on how much hay is required to be stockpiled, which usually amounts to more than their entire required annual yield. Thankfully, hay keeps almost indefinitely in non-humid climates and conditions.

Otaku Mirai says that Otaku lands produces around 15,000 tons of hay per year from its legally set-aside-for-hay farmland, and at least a few thousand more tons from non-mandated hayfarms. Mirai isn’t sure of the current amount of stockpiled hay in the Otaku domain, since the numbers change during wartime and in anticipation of military requirements and he has been at Chai Sedo for the past 16 months, but he estimates at least 20,000 tons of hay in Otaku haybarns.

The Moto army invading Uru lands appears to have in excess of 50,000 horses, as well as many thousands of sheep and cows (though that number is quickly diminishing as the Moto slaughter their flocks and herds). If they were to subsist entirely on hay, bought at market price, this would cost them at least 500 koku per day. What this hay would be worth if delivered safely to Umut is perhaps as much a philosophical question as a logistical one.

Transporting hay can be a hassle because of its weight and awkward density. Hay weighs about 10 pounds per square foot. This makes it heavy enough to require teams of oxen to pull haywagons, while still making volume the limiting factor rather than weight. A standard wagon can only hold about a ton of hay. A standard haycart can hold multiple tons. Large haycarts can hold up to around 5 tons. This means that in addition to other requirements, if the Moto wished to feed their army’s horses using only hay, they would need about 100 large haycarts arriving every day. This would be a gargantuan effort, though still plausibly within the capabilities of the Otaku.

Food purity:

The Moto also have completely different expectations around what foods are acceptable to eat.  There aren’t many places in the area where being ritually unclean will be an issue, though the shrine at Chai Sedo is definitely one of them.

There are many things which can make a person ritually unclean. Being “unclean” doesn’t imply being in a state of sin, but uncleanliness should not be mixed with holyness, and so people who have entered a state of ritual uncleanliness need to purify themselves before they can enter a shrine or temple.

The Moto don’t maintain cleanliness rules, though they evidently have enough comparable concepts that they are usually good about checking before entering a non-Moto shrine or temple – after all, no Moto would want to incur the wrath of a divine being for failing to show it respect or violating one of its taboos.

This section focuses on how long it takes for someone to be capable of fully cleansing themself after having eaten different thing.

Eating fish is not unclean and requires no cleansing whatsoever.

Eating pork or poultry is ritually unclean, but a simple ritual purifying bath is enough to cleanse a person wth no delay.

Eating rabbit, venison, or sheep and requires a special cleansing ritual at a shrine or temple.

Eating goat falls into the same category as rabbit/venison/sheep UNLESS the goat was slaughtered on a particular day of the week and according to the correct ritual process, in which case it is like fish and requires no cleansing because the ritual by which it was slaughtered has already performed the necessary cleansing. Goat is referred to as “mountain tuna” for this reason.

Eating horse or cattle makes you unclean until more than a full month has passed – after that you can cleanse yourself after the beginning of the following new moon.

Moto Laws (the Yassa):

“Yassa” is the Moto word for “law”, though the literal meaning of the word is “secret writings”. Only khans and their specially designated advisors are allowed to read the law, in order to keep people from abusing it.

The Kuraldai mainly handles cases between members of different Moto tribes, though in some cases a khan will have the Kuraldai handle a case involving a close family member. This is extremely rare – most khans handle these matters themselves, but sometimes special circumstances call for special consideration.

Cases that come before the Kuraldai are not public and in particular the Kuraldai’s records are secret. However, those who come before them are not forbidden from speaking about their cases, so there’s a lot of public knowledge even if it’s mainly from biased sources. Khans are also allowed to speak of cases which come before them, so they are generally a more reliable source.

Categories of cases

Most cases you’re told about fall into one of several broad categories.

Tribute cases

When individuals or groups get into arguments and decide to resolve them through some sort of martial contest, the winner often takes tribute, as is their right. However, those who take too much are sometimes accused of exceeding the bounds of tribute and crossing over into taking plunder.

The distinction between “tribute” and “plunder” is an important one in Moto law, though it’s not clear what standard are applied to distinguish them or whether those standards are actually part of the official written Yassa.

These kinds of cases are usually taken to the khans of the two tribes involved first. Tribute cases are different from other cases in that typically the khans themselves represent their tribes even if they were not directly involved in the original dispute which led to the tribute being taken.

Raid cases

Moto families frequently ride through each other’s territories, which is not forbidden but often leads to altercations. This sometimes escalates, when someone who was insulted might return to repay the insult.

What distinguishes a “tribute” case above from a “raid” case is that a tribute case happens when the dispute itself is legitimate. A “raid” case is over the legitimacy of the actions in the dispute. Of course, the line between these can be thin, especially when someone raids another’s territory to take cattle to repay an insult. This is supposedly the most common type of raid-related case. Animals are also taken as repayment when a tribe grazes on another tribe’s territory.

What constitutes a “raid” is also not clear. For instance, sometimes when travelling through another tribe’s territory, a group of Moto will be told to stop on suspicion of being thieves, and then a fight ensues. There’s not a widely known or understood standard for when this is and isn’t able to be demanded.

Theft cases

Cattle and horses are branded, and sheep are painted/inked, with all marks indicating their owners. However, because animals are self-transporting then they sometimes end up in the wrong place.

It’s unclear exactly what standard causes the Kuraldai to declare that something constitutes theft. A single animal seems always be presumed to be an accident, absent extenuating circumstances, such as when the favorite horse of the khan of the Vindicator clan was stolen by some visiting Tornado clansmen.

Animals are also sometimes killed on raids rather than taken. It seems to be the case that even a single horse being killed is dealt with severely, while a sheep or cow being killed is treated as an unserious matter.

In general, someone is expected to be allowed to inspect their neighbor’s herds for animals who wandered off. There several cases where someone refused to allow this, and the ruling was over whether that refusal was justified. Sometimes it is and sometimes it isn’t – the attempted justification is usually some variant of “you insulted me so I told you to get lost and send someone more respectful”. However, it’s not clear exactly what standard is being applied to distinguish between when this is and isn’t allowed.

Love and marriage

If a man and a woman have consentual sexual relations, then either party may demand that they be married. This may not be refused, though in practice sometimes one side or the other denies that they were ever together. There are a number of cases which come before the Kuraldai when members of different tribes have such dalliances.

It is more common for women to demand marriage than men, though there are also plenty of cases where a man demands marriage and the woman denies ever having been with the man. These cases most commonly occur as a result of an unplanned pregnancy, though this is not necessary in order to demand marriage.

There are very few Kuraldai cases involving non-consensual encounters, probably because the Kuraldai only handles matters involving different tribes, and when individuals or small groups of people from different tribes encounter each other they’re almost always all men, as Moto women are expected to remain close to the large family units to tend to the communal flocks and herds.

Perjury

Anyone giving testimony in a case swears an oath to the Kuraldai. The oath is sworn by Hiderigami, the fortune of drought, while pouring a heavy bowl of water upon the dusty earth as the oath is spoken as an offing to Hiderigami. This ensures that purjury will result in drought afflicting the familiy of anyone who forswears themself. In addition, anyone caught telling a lie during their testimony is put to death – given the need for truth to be spoken and the consequences of lying, this seems to be the only known punishment for perjury.

However, in most cases where a ruling would imply perjury, the sentence of purjury doesn’t apply. In particular, if someone testifies to their own innocence and then are found guilty, they are not usually sentenced to death or otherwise found to have perjured themselves. Still, such a sentence is known to sometimes be applied, and it’s not clear what determines when this is considered appropriate.

Relatedly, sometimes a drought occurs shortly after a case comes before the Kuraldai. In such cases, perjury is often assumed to have occurred on the part of the afflicted family, and sometimes cases are reassesed as a result. This can lead to a prior case being overturned and one side potentially being put to death as a sentence for having perjured themselves.

Miscellaneous specific cases

→ Some members of the Suicide Rider clan entered the territory of the Slashing Goat clan. After getting into an argument and being insulted, they hurled insults in return and rode awau. They were followed by a Slashing Goat rider to watch them. They turned around and captured the rider, tying him to a tree and then riding back into Suicide Rider lands. The man they tied up died of thirst before he was found. The Suicide Riders claimed they had no reason to believe this would happen, since he was still in Slashing Goat territory. The Kuraldai ordered them to be buried up to their necks until they themselves died of thirst.

→ Three children from the Desert Wind clan dumped horse feces down a well in the territory of the Reddened Cloak clan as a prank. This led to many of the people getting sick and was deemed poisioning, which always results in death. However, because those involved were children, their fathers were put to death instead for failing to adequately instruct their sons.

→ While Moto Gaheris and his armies were engaged in raids in Lion lands during the war, a number of young men from the Moto tribe got into an argument with some members of the Black Horse clan over grazing and took 20 of their sheep. This resulted in an altercation in which a member of the Black Horse clan was killed. The young men were publicly whipped and forced to pay 100 sheep in repayment.

→ Some farmers (which do actually exist in Moto lands, there just aren’t nearly as many of them as anywhere else) had been suffering a rash of chicken thefts. Some visiting members from the Moto clan were confronted by some local Vindicator clansmen, who demanded to search them and take an accounting of their wherabouts. An altercation resulted, in which two Vindicator clansmen and one Moto clansmen were killed. The Kuraldai ruled that no further action was needed – the Vindicator were presumably within their rights to request a search, and the Moto were presumably within their rights to refuse, and the fight was therefore mutually agreed upon. Or something. Rulings are not always explained, and it’s not clear what the underlying logic was.

Rules of warfare

Moto Jochi explained that the Yassa shall apply to the Uru during warfare against them. This means that any non-Moto participating in warfare may be penalized for violating the Moto rules of warfare, even if they do not know those rules in advance. The Moto view is as simple as “ignorance of the law is no excuse” but rather that the righteous have nothing to fear from the Yassa, and men who act with strength and virtue shall be vindicated in their actions.

Jochi explained the rules the PCs would be bound to.

Forbidden death and plunder

→ Women and children are not to be harmed.

Tetsu asked a few questions about how to stay in compliance with this rule, such as what counts as a child and what to do when attacked. Jochi seemed uncomfortable with this questioning – the Yassa is kept secret to avoid people finding an exploiting loopholes, so he kept his answers vague.

He did say that “taller than the lynchpin of a wagon” was usually what separated a child from a young man. He also explained that penalties would still likely apply if-they killed a woman or child in self-defense – apparently you are permitted to defend yourself but only up to a point. In both cases, Jochi indicated that they should do their best to slay Uru warriors and spare Uru noncombatants.

The “do your best” didn’t seem to be an actual legal standard – it’s not clear whether the Yassa necessarily takes intent into account per se. Rather, this seems in keeping with their “act righteously and you will have nothing to fear” sensibility.

→ Anything outside the home may be taken, including food, crops, and animals. You may allow your horses to graze and otherwise destroy farmland during wartime. (The implication seems to be that this is not permitted during peacetime.)

→ Farmhouses may not be entered. Their doors may be kicked in, and their window shutters bashed open so as to view the interior to search for enemy combatants hiding within.

→ All other types of dwellings may be pillaged, but not for food or tools. Any food or animals outside the home may be taken, but food, animals, and tools inside any type of home must be left for its inhabitants and their families. All other valuables may be taken.

Natsuki asked around, and it seems that the Moto did not keep to these standards for farmhouses and other dwellings during their pillaging of Lion lands. It’s unclear whether this is because the rules of warfare under the Yassa did not apply to the Lion or whether they were simply “honored more in breach than observance”. If this did represent a violation of the Yassa, it’s unclear whether Gaheris knew and tolerated it or if he was ignorant of the conduct of the other Moto.

→ Horses may never be killed, except in battle. Sheep and cattle may be slaughtered and left behind if they cannot be taken for whatever reason.

→ Sources of water may not be defiled, and the destruction of wells is forbidden.

→ Any dwelling other than a farmhouse may be destroyed through fire or other means, but a farmhouse may not. Other buildings which may exist on a farm such as a barn or stables may also be destroyed.

Terms of surrender

Gaheris’ goal is not the eradication of the Uru people, but rather the death of their khan Timur Beg and the loyalty of the surviving Uru under a new khan who obeys him and rides to war under his banner. Gaheris is therefore invested in how surrender shall be taken.

Gaheris doesn’t have many who speak Uru. Moto Munkbat is the head of Gaheris’ ambassadorial corps and his daughters, nieces, and nephews are gifted with languages. However, they only just began to learn Uru when Timur Beg cast them out of Uru lands. However, some of them speak conversational Tuva (one of the other northern tribes), so they are bringing members of the Tuva tribe to help translate.

Jochi explains that under the terms of the Yassa:

→ Those who surrender prior to a battle shall be stripped of their weapons, armor, and horses but allowed to live.

→ Those who surrender after losing a battle may have their surrender refused and be slaughtered to the last. If their surrender is accepted, then additional tribute may be demanded, and some portion of captured prisoners may be put to death as punishment for fighting. At least some who surrender must be spared – it’s not clear if there’s a standard for this.

→ Any who have accepted surrender and have not been selected to be put to death shall be required to swear two oaths to Moto Gaheris.

1) They swear by the 4 Gods of Death to renounce Timur Beg and to recognize Moto Gaheris as the khan of khans.

2) They swear by Hiderigami, the fortune of drought, to never take up arms against the Moto and to only fight alongside them in the future.

Because of the language barrier, the intention is to wait with prisoners until a relative of Moto Munkbat arrives with an Uru-speaking Tuva. The Uru will be lined up, and the Tuva will explain the oaths to the first prisoner in line, who will help explain them to the rest. The first prisoner will reiterate the oaths to all within the sound of his voice and swear to them. Addiitonal Uru within earshot of the first oath-swearer shall announce “I as well”, one by one down the line, thus binding them to the oath as well. This shall be repeated periodically for large groups to ensure that all delcaring “I as well” know what they are swearing to.

“I as well” is known in advance to be “dee tuh” in the Uru language – “dee” is the first person singular and “tuh” means “also” or “to add onto”. Munkbat’s family knows that much at least, so you will know that if any Uru tries to make a different statement then they are attempting to avoid taking the oaths.

This procedure shall happen twice, once for each oath. The second oath shall not be administered until all Uru down the line have sworn to the first oath, to keep the oaths and their penalties separate. It is important to Gaheris that these be separate oaths.

Pillage rights

Jochi is Gaheris’ tribute administator, so this is where his knowledge is strongest. Jochi explicitly said he is not among those permitted to read the written Yassa, and therefore his knowledge is only what has been explained to him by people from that group.

→ Pillage rights are assigned equally between the clans; the Western Star included as a clan for the purpose of tribute and pillage.

This was declared by Gaheris rather than being some pre-existing term of the Yassa. The implication seemed to be that this was exceptional due to the PCs’ exceptional and production of troops to the effort.

→ All taken items and livestock are to be inventoried and shared, with the khan of khans taking “half a tithe, to support the administration of the war and for gifts to His Imperial Majesty the Emperor” (a tithe is 10%, so half a tithe is 5%).

This was said to be “under the new Yassa” and is apparently a change made by Gaheris personally. Gaheris’ pre-battle speach spoke of his generosity and having proven himself in the sharing of pillage from the invasion of the Lion. The rank and file Moto seem to end up with more of a share of pillaged wealth under Gaheris than under previous khans.

Further conversations with Moto Chenghiz reveals that prior to Gaheris pillage rights were assigned, e.g. over certain areas, and a group assigned pillage rights to something just kept whatever they happened to find.

→ After being inventoried, pillage is distributed equally between the khans, to distribute to their own people “under the terms of the Yassa”.

There seems to be some implied standards requiring khans to reward their men amply, though it’s unclear what this is or whether it even applies to the PCs, who have made separate arrangements and are e.g. already paying the Dragon.

The family of Moto Jochi has representatives and assistants in each Moto legion, and they will inventory everything taken to ensure a fair split. Chenghiz will say that “none would dare interfere or refuse inspection” from Jochi’s family.

Rulings under Gaheris

The Tuesday group asked around about Gaheris’ rise to power and how he has treated his opponents as daimyo of the Moto. Thus far, they have specifically spoken to members of the Moto clan and the Vindicator clan.

Gaheris’ father was Moto Soro. The khan of the Moto clan is always the daimyo of the Moto family, but within Moto lands the Moto khan is not necessarily more significant than other khans. This varies from generation to generation, and the position as official daimyo doesn’t result in as much power as it does elsewhere due to the Moto having no position on the Imperial chancellery.

Moto Soro seems to have been a peer on the kuraldai rather than its leader, as Gaheris is. Thus, disputes seem to have involved the Moto clan being peers rather than rulers. Interestingly, the Moto and Vindicator clans give conflicting reports of how this has changed:

→ The Moto complain that “in order to maintain harmony between the clans”, Gaheris has allowed the kuraldai to impose harsher punishments on members of the Moto clan than what other clans suffer whenever a dispute arises between Moto clan members and other clans.

→ The Vindicator complain that the Moto are widely known to receive more lenient sentences or even outright allowed to get away with malfeasance now that Gaheris has become the khan of khans.

Everyone knows that Gaheris has brought back the practice of “measuring against the lynchpin” and makes frequent use of this. However, Tetsu’s investigation raises the possibility that Gaheris has only done this a single time, and merely threatened it as a possible punishment in other cases. “Everyone knows” that this has been a “frequent” punishment handed down by his kuraldai, but no one knows of any specific cases in which the kuraldai has handed out this punishment.

The one time Gaheris is known to have imposed this punishment is against his uncle, Moto Davaajav. (“Davaajav” means “moon of deliverance”.) The brother of Gaheris’ father, Moto Soro, Davaajav appears to have disagreed with his nephew’s positions and policies, and left Karakoru to join a settlement in western Moto clan lands a few dozen miles from the capital.

The specific nature of the dispute is unclear, though Gaheris appears to have canceled a number of projects in Karakoru which his father Soro had begun:

→ Soro renovated the Great Hall which Gaheris currently uses as his seat of government. There were evidently plans to increase the size of the hall to allow feasts with riders from many other clans, but this never went forward.

→ Soro planned to construct a palace for himself. He had evidently grown rich from shrewd business dealings (the particulars are unclear), and he planned to use the proceeds to make a great building intended to impress visitors and serve as his legacy. Gaheris canceled all plans for this palace, and is known to have said something like, “I was born in a yurt, and if I do not fall in combat then I shall die in a yurt.”

→ Gaheris continued his father’s work renovating the Temple of the 7 Fortunes for a time. However, he apparently scaled back the scope of work or possibly canceled it outright after some amount of work was completed. He has evidently said something like, “I used to consider Moto Darqan a wise and prudent man, but from his speeches and sermons, it has become evident to me that he does not possess complete understanding and that his comprehension is but small.” It’s unclear what precisely Moto Darqan has said or done to shrink Gaheris’ opinion of him.

Some combination of these things, perhaps along with some unknown family drama, seems to have led to Moto Davaajav to leave and take up residence in Ulan Bator (“Red Hero”). It’s unclear what precise insult he offered to Gaheris, though he is known to have publicly criticized his nephew. Gaheris evidently took a small force of his closest friends and retainers to Ulan Bator and killed his uncle. He ordered the inhabitants of the settlement measured against the lynchpin, and then ordered the settlement razed to the ground, such that “a man can ride through the town on horseback at full speed in the darkness of night without stumbling”. The survivors were resettled in Karakoru.

Many of the buildings razed were farmhouses, but this appears to have not violated the Yassa. Even those who have criticized the kuraldai as being overly lenient on the Moto do not seem to have taken issue with this – it’s unclear why these buildings were not protected.

Another way in which Gaheris is idiosyncratic: he dismissed his father’s executioner, Moto Chinua, and performs executions personally. One of his four swords, Retirement, is dedicated to executions and dedicated to Wei Tin. Daimyo almost always assign the role of executioner to a retainer, due to the risk of becoming haunted by vengeful ghosts after performing executions. Some executioners, such as Kakita Korihime, turn out to be unusually susceptible to hauntings and cannot continue performing executions.

Gaheris has no such fear of ghosts – it’s unclear whether this has made him immune to hauntings (those with less fear of ghosts are known to be more resistant to such apparitions) or if he merely pays no heed to the vengeful dead.

Gaheris has apparently performed a single execution since arriving in Uru lands. Moto Khavarsaikhan was found to have entered an Uru farmhouse and was brought before Gaheris, who passed a death sentence and carried out the execution personally.

The written Yassa

In recognition for his achievements, Kitsuki Tetsu has been given access to the Yassa. Although the “full written Yassa” is back in Karakoru and includes things like a listing of all titles of nobility and government positions, the actual legal regulations of the written Yassa seems quite thin. The Moto do not use the common law system employed by the rest of Rokugan, and there doesn’t appear to be any supplemental written commentary or explanations of why the laws exist as they do. Contrast this with the sermon-like parables and explanations given by Soshi Saibankan in his rulings, which served as a model for how most Rokugani magistrates conduct themselves.

What follows is intended to be a near-complete copy of the “partial” Yassa which Tetsu was given access to. I’ve included some out-of-character notes in parenthesis – the literal text of the Yassa is prefixed by > characters indicating that it's quoting the actual text.

> It is ordered to believe that man stands above hell under the rule of heaven, and that the celestial order alone is responsible for his life and death, riches and poverty.

> Monks and priests, persons who are dedicated to religious practice, physicians, teachers, and eta who bathe the bodies of the dead are to be freed from conscription or being taxed or put to any required service.

> It is forbidden for any gaijin to hold a noble station, government appointment, or honorary title.

(These first several entries appear to support the assertion made by Moto Bilguun that the Yassa is an implementation of Imperial law and that the Moto enforce the Emperor’s law and justice in their own way rather than being some separate, parallel system. Other entries below seem to contradict this.)

> No title of nobility shall be inherited. It is a capital offense for any man to call himself a khan without having been chosen by the nobles of his family, or for any man to call himself the khan of khans without having been chosen by the kuraldai.

(This is not how past Moto daimyo were chosen – Gaheris is personally the daimyo of the Moto because his father Moto Soro was daimyo before him. As far as the PCs know, khanship is generally hereditary as well, at least among some of the eastern Moto clans. Thus, this appears to be a new law put in place by Gaheris and his kuraldai.)

> It is forbidden to make peace with any gaijin leader or people who have not surrendered. Those who surrender before battle shall be permitted to live, but those who surrender after battle may be slaughtered to the last.

> The ruling that divides men of the army into platoons, companies, battalions, legions, and armies is to be maintained. This arrangement serves to raise an army in a short time, and to form raw units of commands.

> The moment a campaign begins, each Moto must receive his arms from the hand of the officer who has them in charge. The soldier must keep them in good order, and have them inspected by his officer before a battle.

(Anywhere else in the Empire, bushi (and even many non-bushi samurai) carry and maintain their weapons at all times. A bushi’s daisho is passed down across generations and serves as an important family artifact. This law supports what the PCs have already observed in this campaign – that the bulk of Gaheris’ armies are made up of herdsmen who evidently don’t own their own weapons.)

> Forbidden, under the death penalty, to pillage the enemy before the general commanding gives permission; but after this permission is given the soldier must have the same opportunity as the officer, and must be allowed to keep what he has carried off, provided he has paid his share to the receiver for the khan of khans on behalf of the Emperor.

> To keep the men of the army exercised, a great hunt shall be held every winter. On this account, it is forbidden for any man in Moto lands to kill from the 1st month to the 9th month, deer, bucks, roe-bucks, hares, wild ass and some birds.

> All khans and nobles of the Moto shall be bound by the Yassa just the same as the most lowly herder.

> It is forbidden to cut the throats of animals slain during a hunt in the manner of a herd animal. Game animals must be bound before the killing blow is dealt, the chest opened and the heart pulled out by the hand of the hunter.

(Evidently this practice has offended the kadiahn of the northern forest, who claim that it upsets the local forest and animal gods. Tetsu will probably need to find some way to satisfy both the Moto and Goros traditions.)

> It is permitted to eat the blood and entrails of animals – though this was forbidden before our return to our ancestral lands.

(Although not technically illegal in the rest of Rokugan, this would never be done by other samurai. It would be heretical if the Moto declared that it was ritually clean, since that would contradict the Imperial Ministry of Rites. However, the Moto appear to generally be respectful of cleanliness traditions of shrines and temples when visiting other domains, if only because it would be stupid to offend the local gods.)

> A list of privileges and immunities assured to the chieftains and officers of the Moto clans is to be maintained in Karakoru as part of all full copies of the complete Yassa.

(It’s unclear to Tetsu whether this full list is literally the only thing separating the abbreviated Yassa from the full Yassa.)

> Every man who does not go to war must work for his khan, without reward, for a certain time, except for farmers, who exist above laborers and below Moto. The homes of farmers may not be entered, not even during wartime.

> Entertainers shall no longer have the same status as prostitutes and shall instead be awarded the same standing as laborers, and may not have their food or tools taken from their homes as tribute or pillage.

> Prostitution is illegal in Rokugan by Imperial decree, though this is usually honored more in breach than observance. In general, the above few rules do seem to comport with the Celestial Order – farmers are heimin (half-people), servants and laborers are hinin (non-people), criminals are the lowest form of hinin (worthy of less respect even than the hinin eta “untouchables”).

> Men guilty of the theft or destruction of a horse or a thing of equal value will be punished by death and their bodies cut into two parts. For lesser thefts the punishment shall be, according to the value of the thing stolen, a number of blows of a staff – seven, seventeen, seventy-seven, up to seven hundred. But this bodily punishment may be avoided by paying seven times the worth of the thing stolen.

> Torture may not be used to gain information in a criminal investigation, and torture may never be imposed abruptly.

(Torture to gain confessions is illegal everywhere in the Empire by Imperial decree. Torturing someone who has already been found guilty of a crime in order to induce them to provide information they are known to have in order to implicate others is permitted. The Kitsuki generally frown on this – although the standard is supposed to be that torture is only used to get verifiable information, in practice when employed it usually ends up producing unsubstatiatable declarations that anyone would give just to make the torture stop and sometimes convicts other innocent people.)

> Any man who can ride a horse and fight for his khan may call himself a Moto and may not be taken as a servant or laborer.

(This order is probably the closest that the Yassa comes to just saying “screw it, we don’t recognize the Celestial Order”. It basically says “anyone who can fight is a samurai regardless of birth”. If someone wanted to argue that this wasn’t heretical, they could point out that any daimyo in the Empire may elevate any peasant to samurai status at their discretion. In the rest of the Empire, this is done rarely, such as when Mirumoto Guru’s grandfather saved the life of his daimyo as an ashigaru. But there’s technically nothing in Imperial law stopping Gaheris, in his capacity as daimyo of the Moto family, from elevating random herdsman to samurai status. Whether or not this kind of blanket, automated, impersonal elevation would be declared heretical by the Imperial Ministry of Rites has never been tested.)

> All children shall be given instruction in reading and religious doctrine in the winter.

> No merchant or customer may declare bankruptcy more than twice without suffering imprisonment or death.

> The law of marriage orders that every man shall pay dowry for his wife, and that marriage between the first and second degrees of kinship is forbidden. A man may marry only one woman but may have several concubines. The women should attend to the care of property, buying and selling at their pleasure. Men should occupy themselves only with hunting and war. Children born of concubines are legitimate as the children of wives. The offspring of the first woman shall be honored above other children and shall inherit everything.

> Adultery with a woman of a different household is to be punished by death, and those guilty of it may be slain out of hand. Adultery within a household shall be handled within that household.

> If two families wish to be united by marriage and have only young children, the marriage of these children is allowed, if one be a boy and the other a girl. If the children are dead, the marriage contract may still be drawn up.

> Spies, false witnesses, any man who kills a woman or child, all men given to infamous vices, and all tsukai are condemned to death. Other criminals who repent their wrong doings may be granted amnesty according to established procedures.

(As you may have noticed, a lot of the Yassa is extremely vague, e.g. condemning men of “infamous vices” to death. It’s also unclear whether “established procedure” is something that’s actually part of the full written Yassa or to what extent the Moto are just winging it.)

> Officers and chieftains who fail in their duty, or do not come at the summons of their khan are to be slain, especially in western lands. If their offense be less grave, they must come in person before the khan of khans.

> It is forbidden to bathe or wash garments in running water during thunder.

(This one seems oddly specific, and presumably there’s some kind of story behind it, though Tetsu is unaware of any particulars.)

To the extent that the above laws constitute the bulk of Moto laws, it’s notable how many things aren’t written down. There’s basically nothing procedural, and even most simple laws and customs seem to be simply practiced rather than recorded.





BETWEEN PLACES:

Now let's refocus on Rokugan itself, specifically talking about some miscellaneous setting details which I find interesting and which reflect my vision for the setting.

I've repeatedly made reference to the Forgotten Tomb, which is something I come back to periodically.  This is a general category of place which I refer to as one of the "between places", i.e. places which are coexistent between two different realms.

Here's another introduction that I wrote for a different adventure, in which the PCs journeyed deep into a cave to meet with a gaijin shaman-woman who they believed had wisdom to share with them:

The morning light fades quickly behind you, being already mainly blocked by the Twilight Mountains.
As you walk deeper into the cave, the light from your lanterns begins to spread out in front of you.
Normally a lantern radiates light, illumating closer things more brightly than distant surfaces.
But you walk into the tunnel, you find that very little light is cast behind you, and the light
in front of you is so dissipated that it creates the effect of an ambient glow, illuminating the
passage evenly.  You quickly find that you can see the turn in the tunnel 20 feet ahead of you as
clearly as the hand in front of your face, though the same does not apply to the path behind you,
into which the light quickly scatters and disperses into the darkness.

As you go deeper, you find that the smoke from your lantern also intensifies, but without the
lantern itself flaring as it would if it encountered marsh fumes or mine gases.  Instead, the smoke
rolls out in waves onto the floor ahead of you, being carried faster and more intensely than the
slight breeze at your backs can account for.

Eventually you come to a dip in the passage, where most of the tunnel is submerged in water.  The
water is quite cold, and ordinarily you might prefer to avoid it as much as possible, to avoid
frostbite or worse.  But the smoke from your lantern seems to have multiplied, possibly joining
some existing smoke hovering above the water.  Indeed, the smell of the smoke has shifted, the
oily smoke of your lantern mixing with the smoke from some other fires which must be burning
ahead.  As people familiar with mines as "silver miners", you feel confident that the vapors
you're encountering are not the "damps" of mine gases, and in fact the smoke seems unnatural.

You are entering one of the "between places".  People have sometimes gotten lost in the Shinomen Forest only a hundred miles from the Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands and exited the Isawa Woodlands in Phoenix lands.  The Shifting Islands around the Mantis Isles are another example, where chidren playing have fallen asleep and woken up off the coast of Otosan Uchi.  Depending on the makeup of this place, you might find an exit out into the Ivory Kingdom.  Though of course, the most dangerous type of "between places" are the ones which are coexistent between different realms.  The Forgotten Tomb simultaneously exists in the mortal world and in Yomi, the realm of the honored dead.  Regardless of what type of place you are in, this may be your last chance to turn back.

(end of introduction)





THE BURNING SANDS DESERT

Something I like in worldbuilding is when there is genuine ambiguity around the nature of something within the setting.  For such an example of "legitimate" debate, consider the existence of the Burning Sands Desert.  The following is also drawn from some of my notes from a previous campaign:

The Burning Sands desert begins at the edge of Moto lands, which are themselves about 400 miles wide. Medin al Salaat is approximately 400 miles deep into the desert. The desert extends along the entire Western side of the Twilight Mountains, and then further south, where it makes up the western border of the Shadowlands all the way down to the edge of the Ivory Kingdom, and is thus at least 1500 miles “tall”.

It’s unclear why such a large area is made up entirely of desert – this is said by traders on the Ki Rin Trail to be the largest desert in the world. The desert has fewer elemental kami than one might expect – there aren’t many fire kami despite the great heat, and the earth kami are either small and scattered or large and slumbering. Denizens of Medin al Salaat describe the desert as “inhabited neither by men nor jinn”.

It is widely agreed, both in Rokugan and even among gaijin, that Lady Sun is responsible for the state of the desert, though people disagree on why and how this came to happen. The following sections summarize several differing accounts of how the Burning Sands desert was created by Lady Sun.

GAIJIN FABLES:

According to stories passed down through the Hidden Way, the Burning Sands desert is said by gaijin to have once been a lush and fertile land. The region was cursed by Lady Sun, though different groups in Medin al Salaat have different explanations as to why.

According to the Ashalan, Lady Sun was once imprisoned there by the forces of the underworld, who wished the world to be plunged into eternal darkness. A fearsome oni was left to guard the entrance to her prison. A man named Ali crept into the entrance of the cave and distracted the oni with a golden mirror, allowing him to slay it with a crysteel knife.  When Lady Sun was freed, her fire burned away the land which had served as her prison as she returned to the heavens.

According to the Almekhem, the King of Jinn invaded the night sky with his armies, put out most of the stars in the heavens, and caused Lord Moon to fall into a deep slumber. He then imprisoned Lady Sun in a prison made of his own awful face. After the war between men and jinn, the power of jinn was sealed by invoking the power of Lady Sun, and this seal burned away the water of the ocean and greenery of the land which lay where the Burning Sands desert now lies.

BLESSINGS AND CURSES

There are a number of stories how and why the desert was scorched. Shosuro, the priestess queen who swore fealty to Bayushi during the founding of the Scorpion clan, explained that the gods appear to humans from behind masks. Rivers and oceans are merely the masks worn by the water kami, just as ground and mountains are the masks of the earth kami. What we see in the sky during the daytime is only the mask worn by Lady Sun, whose true form we cannot comprehend. The desert is what remains in the aftermath of Lady Sun briefly removing her mask, casting her true gaze upon part of the moral world for only an instant.

The Togashi monks have no one canonical story of how the desert came to exist, but they question the assumption that the desert represents Lady Sun’s anger or displeasure. The desert seems to command more of Lady Sun’s attention than other places, this is true. Yet does that not imply that this land has her favor? The attention of divine beings can be terrifying, but if Lady Sun’s blessing appears to be some form of curse, then does that not simply raise questions about how we understand blessings and curses and whether there is even any difference between them?

LADY SUN'S APOLOGY

"This book is a hoax, planted in libraries around the Empire by Isawa Akuma in the 5th century. Although its contents are fraudulent, it is believed to be adapted from other works whose authorship is unknown, and therefore it has not been banned by the Imperial Ministry of Rites. Anyone who discovers a copy of this book without this disclaimer is ordered to report it to the office of the Jade Champion."  (The quoted paragraph is the legally mandated disclaimer which appears at the beginning of every legitimate copy of the book Lady Sun's Apology.)

In the late 5th century, copies of a strange book called “Lady Sun’s Apology” appeared in libraries around the Empire. Each copy appeared to be centuries old, and many of them seemed to have been in those libraries for quite some time. Most copies were only uncovered after news began to spread and librarians began to scour their collections to see whether they too happened to possess a copy. The book was eventually found to be a hoax created by Isawa Akuma, and therefore the above disclaimer comes at the beginning of every modern copy.

The book contains an alternate (false) history of the Shadowlands invasion a millenium ago. The lands to the west were inhabited by a civilization of nonhuman creatures whose name no longer exists. Because the name of this nonhuman race has been lost, the book refers to them only as The Race. The Race had the ability to consume and purify the Shadowlands taint – not in the way that goblins feed on it, but by actually expelling it from the world. This gave humanity the chance to defeat the Shadowlands – rather than simply stopping it from spreading, there was the chance of actual victory.

When the Shadowlands invaded, humanity allied with The Race to defeat Fu Leng’s armies. This book details how the armies of the Race fell against the Shadowlands, suffering worse defeats than any human army. After the Shinsei revealed the Prophecy of the Age of Man and left with the Seven Thunders, leaders of The Race feared what humans would do after the war ended. And so, with humans having already put their plan to win the war into action, their ambassadors to the humans assassinated Hantei and burned Otosan Uchi to the ground.

In retribution for the murder of her favorite child, Lady Sun invoked the Accords of Creation and revoked the existence of The Race, declaring that now and throughout all of the eternity, the world shall exist as if their species had never been created, all of their consequences removed from the flow of time. And so it came to pass that Hantei was never killed, Otosan Uchi was never burned, and humanity’s war against the Shadowlands was never truly winnable.

Lady Sun’s Apology is so titled because it concludes with an apology from Lady Sun to humanity, given by the High Priest of Amaterasu, who is listed as the author of this book. Lady Sun explains that humanity’s struggles will be far worse than if she had allowed these events to happen. She has written this book through her high priest so that humans will understand that their endless struggles against the Shadowlands come from a mother’s love. She implores the reader to understand that no mother could have stood by and allowed her son to be murdered, not when she had the power to prevent it. Because of a mother’s love, the Burning Sands desert now lies forever empty, devoid of the hope for an end to the Shadowlands it could have contained.

Although this book is a hoax, it’s an extremely puzzling one for a number of reasons. It references things such as the “Accords of Creation” which have never appeared in any other historical account, along with the title “High Priest of Amaterasu”, which was not known outside the Emperor’s inner circle of advisors at the time the book was released. The general thinking is that Isawa Akuma cobbled together a book from existing sources taken from his Great Library (the Oni no Akuma which created the library and which is the library), since the library contains “many of the books which never were written”. Such books are useful for hoaxes, since they won’t be traceable to other sources, but they are usually quite strange and unworldly.

As for Akuma’s motives in publishing the hoax, the commonly accepted conclusion is that Akuma wanted to spread the idea that the Shadowlands taint is not inherently evil, and that Heaven originally planned for humanity to overcome it. Indeed, the book makes reference to members of The Race cleaning up after rituals performed by tsukai, to prevent the Shadowlands taint from upsetting the kami. This implies that tsukai were originally intended by heaven to be capable of practicing maho without upsetting the kami, which seems like the kind of thing an oni-summoning tsukai shugenja such as Akuma would want people to believe.





THE FORTUNES:

While some historical polytheistic religions have a concept of gods who are basically just humans with superpowers, I don't want that at all for my fictional setting of Rokugan.  The idea that the fortunes are part of the fabric of reality is a core part of the theology of my worldbuilding.

In my version of Rokugan, one question which arises is why the fortunes do not give clearer direction to humanity.  Kitsu Okura wrote the book "On the Relationship between Man and the Fortunes" 300 years ago, which sought to tackle this question.  He identifies what he calls "the six doctrines" which attempt to explain this mystery.

Here is the introduction to that book, which I wrote as a "primary source document" for my players to read.  Hopefully this will help explain these concepts as well for the purpose of generating vows:

We seek to know the will of the fortunes, to follow their guidance, to gain their favor, and to teach our children to do the same.  Few accomplish any part of this undertaking, for the ways of the fortunes are inscrutable.  Even those lucky and unlucky few whom the fortunes contact directly seldom comprehend the messages they’ve received.

Why should this be?  Why do the fortunes not communicate their desires more clearly?  When their instructions are misunderstood, their wishes often go unfulfilled.

I have traveled the world, combed through every library of note, and interviewed every living authority with wisdom to offer, from Isawa no Naka Kuro to Togashi Hoshi to the Council of Elemental Masters to the Qabal of the Sahir.  All collected wisdom on this topic divides roughly into six major doctrines, which I shall articulate herein.  All of them are wrong, and I shall explain in this treatise the particular failures of each to explain the immense complexity of the ways of the fortunes.  Yet each doctrine contains a glimpse of the truth, so by comprehending each well enough to studiously reject it, we bring ourselves closer to true understanding.

What follows is a brief summary of the six doctrines, each corresponding to the lengthier section of my treatise in which I expound and catalog their merits and flaws.

1) Just as we cannot truly comprehend the will and nature of the fortunes, they struggle to understand our limited minds.  Being so vast in their existence, the fortunes speak to us as we might attempt to communicate with worms.  The more attention and effort is brought to bear, the more danger the worm may be crushed by the weight of the superior being.

2) The fortunes push against one another with their very existence.  Consider the forces which direct human behavior.  Fear, desire, regret.  Loyalty, compassion, courage.  Love, hate, joy.  When we break our normal routine to attempt some great endeavor, it means those forces within ourselves are out of proportion and an overflowing of some emotion spurs us to action.  So too with the fortunes, who collectively maintain the balance of the world itself.  When a fortune commands mortals to act, their instructions are muddied by the thousand other fortunes pulling with a thousand other directions.

3) Our struggle to better understand their instructions is what the fortunes truly desire.  When the teacher sends his pupil on a pilgrimage, it is often the journey and not the destination which matters.  Likewise, after completing some great enterprise on behalf of the fortunes, we must consider whether the task itself was their goal, or the result it produced within us as we struggled to obey them.

4) The fortunes desire only the greatest and most dedicated followers to be rewarded with their blessings.  Why should they squander power and effort on those who will fail to act without clear instructions?  By giving enigmatic directions, only their shrewdest and most resourceful disciples will succeed and prove worthy of being imbued with their power.

5) Communicating their will unambiguously carries a high price, which is rarely worth paying.  Lesser spirits are easily understood by humans, but the fortunes must reduce themselves to such an inferior existence for a time when they choose to communicate clearly.  Why should they bear that burden when their mortal servants are already given sufficient direction to discern their will?

6) The fortunes are vast in their existence, but humans are deep in our nature.  We are composed of many disparate parts, and a single fortune is the avatar of only a single piece of our composition.  While that existence has a weight far beyond mortal man, in a sense it is we who are the giants, for we are constructions of all the fortunes combined.  The fortunes are clear to any who listen, but we so rarely pay our attention to whatever small part of ourselves speaks their will that we wrongly call the fortunes unfathomable.

Note that all of the above continues the running theme of the fortunes as cycle/connection entities which make up the fabric of reality.  Moreover, these doctrines highlight the dynamic nature of the relationship between the fortunes and humans. Whether it's the struggle to understand their instructions, the selective rewarding of their most dedicated followers, or the transformative impact of undertaking tasks on their behalf, these doctrines suggest that the relationship with the fortunes is not just about receiving clear, direct guidance, but also about personal growth, self-discovery, and connection with the deeper truths of existence.

This makes the concept of swearing a vow to a fortune all the more significant, as it's not just a promise to an individual deity, but a commitment to engage with a fundamental aspect of reality and existence. This commitment is not just about following a set of rules or achieving specific outcomes, but also about embracing the challenge, uncertainty, and transformation inherent in the process.

Here's some extra information about the names of fortunes in my setting, in case it matters.

Many stories about fortunes involve a human becoming a fortune after their death.  This can be confusing because the aspect the fortunes represent always predate the death of that human.  So when we talk about a human becoming a fortune, this generally means one of two things.

In most cases of a human becoming a fortune, the person was so in tune with a particular fortune that upon their death their soul does not descend into Jigoku (the underworld) but instead becomes one with the fortune.  The Emperor will then officially recognize this, and thereafter anyone referring to that fortune will have a name that can be used to identify and connect to that fortune in their religious practices.

In other cases, the Emperor may use his divine power to elevate a person’s soul, causing them to become one with a fortune after their death.  This helps someone who is deemed worthy but whose life was too short to have reached this point on their own.  This helps both the person and all of humanity by providing the world with a name to which they can direct their prayers and offerings.

In both situations, the fortune existed prior to the death of the human and being given a human name.  Many fortunes went by multiple other names in the days before the Great Ancestors brought civilization to humanity.  Although it is not heretical to refer to fortunes by other names, it’s considered uncultured and demonstrates ignorance of proper doctrine.

This is my way as the GM of resolving all of the stories of people "becoming" a fortune upon their death.  when a human "becomes" a fortune, it's more about the human's soul merging with, or becoming aligned with, a pre-existing facet of reality represented by the fortune. The individual doesn't create a new fortune, but rather becomes part of an existing one, which reflects their deep connection with the principle or aspect of life that the fortune embodies. The naming of fortunes, whether through recognition by the Emperor or association with a particular human, is a way for people to more easily understand, relate to, and connect with these complex and profound forces.

In other cases a fortune has been identified by name without using a name which once belonged to a human.  For example, Bishamon, the Fortune of Strength, has always been known as Bishamon, rather than being named for any specific, identifiable human with that name.

I mentioned "Doji Shizue and the Secrets of Calligraphy" before, and in Rokugan there is a play with that title.  In the play Shizue has sought out the advice of the Kitsu Okura.  The family line of Kitsu Okura denounces this scene, which is the only scene in which Kitsu Okura appears, though his descendents have declined to say which specific part is not accurate to fails to reflect their family understanding of the fortunes.

Here is the scene, which I wrote as an in-universe example of how some people talk about the fortunes:

Act 2, Scene 2

Okura:  Suppose that you were touched by the Fortune of obedience, whom I shall not name here.  Consider for a moment what would follow.

Shizue (frowning):  Is there such a Fortune?  I have not encountered such in my studies, not in any library in the Empire.

Okura:  Pfaw!  I spoke the word ‘obedience’ and you felt my meaning.  Are you foolish enough to doubt the existence of its Fortune simply because lesser scholars have failed to learn his name?

Shizue:  Apologies.  What effect would result from being touched by the great Fortune of obedience?

Okura (sharply):  Did you not tell me you’d studied such things?

Shizue:  Yes of course.  I imagine... my loyalty to my lord would increase, while my subordinates’ loyalty to me would likewise increase.

Okura:  Ha!  You assume a human sensibility from a divine being.  Obedience is not loyalty, and it is loyalty rather than obedience which Akodo identifies as a virtue of bushido.  And your Fortune would care nothing for any virtue, only that you obey your orders without thought, question, or hesitation.

Shizue:  I see.  I would need to cleave my own judgement apart from my loyalty, leaving merely dumb obedience.  Only then would my service to the fortune be rewarded.

Okura:  And what do you imagine your reward would be?

Shizue:  Good luck and prosperity, especially in the sphere of the fortune’s influence.  My lord would know I would never betray him - could never betray him - and would grant me authority over many households.  Those under me would find themselves possessed of a share of the same obedience I cultivate in myself.

Okura (amused):  You are not... entirely wrong.  Yet you underestimate the cost of your service, as well as its rewards.  Tell me, if your obedience increased beyond normal human capacity, what pieces of yourself do you imagine would likewise decrease?

Shizue:  Certainly all forms of treachery... but that would not be enough.  By choosing dumb obedience, I would sacrifice away my capacity to pass judgement and decide right from wrong.  Taken far enough, I may lose even the ability to comprehend what outcomes my actions may have, since all that would matter to me is that I obey my lord.

Okura:  Indeed.  You would find yourself with the contentment of the Enlightened, blissfully instrumenting your daimyo’s will.  Yet you might also struggle to remember, as you looked at the faces of your children, what it means when they smile or frown.

Shizue:  Oh my.  Can any balance be struck?

Okura (derisively):  With the Fortune of obedience?

Shizue:  Oh.  I suppose not.  If my daimyo wished otherwise, I might be unable to choose balance over extremity.  Given time, I might be unable to even comprehend the concept.  But surely this is not the case with every Fortune!

Okura:  Are you a gambler?  If you find such consequences unacceptable, would you still choose this path on the wager that you escape them?

Shizue:  … for the sake of my family I would sacrifice anything.  Even my humanity, though I pray this shall not be required of me.

Okura:  Then answer me this: what separates the Seven Fortunes of Good Luck from the remainder of the Thousand Fortunes?

Shizue (confused):  They are the Great Fortunes, and the remainder are the Lesser Fortunes.

Okura (forcefully):  Wrong!  There is no Greater or Lesser, any more than a chain has a greater or lesser link.

Shizue:  Why then are the Seven elevated above the rest?

Okura:  An intelligent question!  Hard enough to comprehend why it should be asked, and harder still to answer.  Name the aspects of the Seven Fortunes.

Shizue:  Romantic Love.  Strength.  Contentment.  Wealth.  Longevity.  Honest Work.  Mercy.

Okura:  A strange assortment of things.

Shizue:  I’d never considered... how were these Seven selected?

Okura:  As you know, by the Hantei in consultation with the Shinsei through wisdom far beyond either of us.  But you ask the wrong question.

Shizue:  Ah.  To what goals did the Teacher and the Son of Heaven aspire in their selection?

Okura:  You shall not believe me.

Shizue:  I shall!

Okura:  All extremes lead to disaster.  The Fortunes are extremity itself.  Yet it is by their favor that humanity has won its way into the Age of Man, so we must court disaster through worship of those extremes.  The Seven Fortunes are the least disastrous combination of extremities.

Shizue:  I... can see the disaster in tragic love, the immoral acquisition of wealth, the brutality of war... but certainly there is greatness as well as disaster.

Okura:  Indeed.  And that is the balance you seek.  Not between the Fortune’s values and your own, but between greatness and disaster.  And not the middle ground between them, but the future which encompasses both in equal measure.  Is that what you seek?

Shizue:  I... don’t know.

Okura:  Had you given any other answer, I would have sent you away.  But I think I can see the shape of your future.  I shall describe your destiny to you, and then you may decide whether to walk away.

End Scene

The description which Kitsu Okura gives in this fictional account of a real encounter is not strictly heretical, though it differs from how the 7 Major Fortunes of Good Luck are generally described.

With that being said, one concept which the wise do understand in Rokugan is the extent to which being closely connected with any Fortune, or indeed any divine being, profoundly changes any human being.  Someone might set out to gain the power of a Fortune because of some goals, and by the time they have attained the favor and power with which to accomplish that goal, they find their original plans no longer hold value to them.





A recurring concept in my setting is that people who encounter supernatural entities are "touched" by the experience, in ways which can be seen as both a blessing and a curse.

For example, I was looking at some of my notes for a past campaign, in which Kuni Isamu was a Witch Hunter who visited the Forgotten Tomb, a "between place" which exists simultaneously in the mortal realm and in Yomi, the realm of the honored dead.  While he was there, he visited the Classrooms of the Great Masters to seek guidance and instruction on how to be a better Witch Hunter and how to seek out bloodspeakers.  He was granted new insights and abilities but as also changed in ways which impaired his perception and ability to communicate.

Here's what I wrote about how this worked after it happened:

Some of this is vague and Isamu will need to discover over time the
exact mechanics and how to trigger these newfound abilities, but
here's what he knows now about what he's learned how to do:

1) Isamu gained some ability to detect through interrogation whether
or not someone has a connection to bloodspeakers.  A lot of cases are
cracked not by interrogating bloodspeakers themselves, but by finding
out about suspicious activities from their neighbors and relatives.
Unfortunately, even innocent peasants are typically fearful when being
interrogated by Witch Hunters, which makes it hard to figure out who's
actually hiding something.  Isamu has gained a "supernatural"
ability to discern through successful interrogation rolls whether
someone is connected to a bloodspeaker, though he will have to figure
out the normal way whether that connection is as a friend, neighbor,
relative, customer, etc.

I put "supernatural" in quotes because the great scholars would say that the difference between a
"natural" and a "supernatural" ability is a false distinction which
demonstrates several fundamental misunderstandings about the nature of
reality.  On the other hand, the Shinsei once said, "All explanations
are false, but some explanations are useful."

2) Bloodspeaker covens are often connected by members who move back
and forth between covens in different cities.  Tracking these
movements is tremendously difficult and Witch Hunters are rarely able
to follow these chains and take down multiple linked covens in
succession.  Isamu has gained a "supernatural" ability to see the
patterns in a single coven such that with successful investigation
rolls he can discern the next city in the chain.  He won't know where
in the city to look, but when combined with his first ability, it
should be significantly easier to find the "needle in the haystack"
and the continue the process.

3) Witch Hunters already know the following things about Bloodspeaker covens:

-> Bloodspeakers trace their "lineage" through their teachers.  For
example, the name "Jama no Iuchiban Kohaku" indicates that Kohaku was
instructed personally by Iuchiban, and the name "Jama no Kohaku
Hoshiko" indicates that Julie's character from the peasant campaign
was personally instructed by Jama Kohaku, etc.

-> Different bloodspeaker covens therefore tend to be in different
"families" in the sense that their lineages could theoretically be
traced back to different lieutenants of Iuchiban, though much of the
time the coven itself wouldn't even know which one.

-> There exist ideological variations between bloodspeaker "families",
e.g. some covens seem to treat murdering samurai as a noble goal unto
itself, while others treat it as a means to an end.  This is not well
studied or understood, supposedly because the existing research hasn't
yielded more effective techniques for hunting bloodspeakers.

-> These "families" were founded after Hiruma lands fell during the
invasion of the Maw.  Evidently the bloodspeakers involved (led by
Jama Kohaku) "protected" the peasants in Hiruma lands from the
invading army and led them safely back into the Empire, but told them
that anyone who wanted to join them as apprentices could learn how to
wield the dark power they had witnessed.  Apparently so many peasants
took them up on this that most bloodspeaker covens that exist today
can be traced back to the peasants who accepted this offer.

Interestingly, Isamu had no idea that any of this was true, but in the
Classrooms of the Great Masters this was presented as being existing
knowledge already well understood by the Witch Hunters, which implies
that for whatever reason this is a part of history which is kept
secret even from most Witch Hunters.  Isamu has no idea why this would
be the case, since it doesn't seem like particularly dangerous
knowledge for Witch Hunters to have.

Isamu has gained the "supernatural" ability to understand the
different bloodspeaker ideologies, which will allow him to create
"family trees" of covens over time.  Not only that, it would allow
Isamu to understand the differences of opinion that exist between the
different groups of bloodspeakers, and how closely the different
groups work together.  Isamu can see a few ways in which this could
lead to being able to hunt bloodspeakers more effectively, and the
Great Teacher who gave this lecture promised that this was somehow the
key to truly understanding bloodspeakers (though this claim seems hard
to believe).

However, as we've discussed, there are advantages as well as drawbacks to seeing the world more clearly.  Isamu lost "three aspects" of the underworld skill, though each aspect
of perception he lost is cross-cutting and relates to other skills as
well.  It will take him quite a lot of time to figure all of this out,
but here's what he'll come to understand about what he lost within the
next few years:

1) KNOWLEDGE

Isamu no longer understands the distinction between something being
legal or illegal.  This applies to physical objects,
actions/behaviors, ideologies, etc.  None of this affects Isamu's
drive to hunt bloodspeakers or fight the Shadowlands, since he was
never motivated to do those things out of regard for the legalism of
it.  Still, he's not going to comprehend what other people are
babbling on about when they talk about legal precedents and such.

Some would argue that Isamu has gained something here rather than lost
anything.  All distinctions are false (though some distinctions are
useful), so it's plausible that Isamu now understands the world so
much better than everyone else that he has cast aside the simple
untruth of "legality" and now perceives the world closer to how it
truly exists.  His difficulty in communicating with others would
therefore not stem from his own lack of understanding of a basic
concept, but rather due to others' failure to grasp a much more
complex concept which only Isamu comprehends.

2) PERSUASION

Isamu can no longer construct persuasive arguments (e.g. make open or
contested rolls) involving investigations into anything covered by the
underworld skill.  This does include bloodspeakers.  He can still
indicate a course of action he believes to be best, and he can still
respond to patient questions if someone wants to ask for details about
what factors led him to believe in that course of action.  Someone
else could therefore argue on his behalf afterwards based on this
knowledge.  However, if he was put on the spot by someone who
disagreed with him, he would be incapable of arguing the point in a
way that would be persuasive.

Since Isamu is capable of arguing about other things, and since he's
capable of explaining himself on things related to underworld, this is
further evidence that he hasn't "lost" anything but is instead now
operating on a higher level than everyone else.  The reason why he
cannot engage in persuasive argumentation might be that he now
possesses an understand deeper than language can express, and he
therefore cannot use this understanding to persuade anyone who lacks
his insight into the true nature of the world.

3) PERCEPTION

Isamu can no longer perceive physical contraband.  In other words, if
a physical object is illegal, he won't be able to perceive it's
existence.  He could be standing next to a giant pile of opium or
watching people gamble over a dice game or look directly at an
obsidian sword and have no idea that anything illegal was in his
presence.

This is probably the best evidence *against* the argument that Isamu
is now simply operating on a higher level than everyone else.  It's
hard to see this as anything other than a handicap.  However, perhaps
more study would reveal some deeper truth about this "disability"
which would show it to not be that simple.  Like I said, the above
explanations are simply what Isamu will come to understand within the
first few years of living with these newfound perks and quirks.





Now let's synthesize some concepts we've discussed with some more examples I find interesting.  One thing I strive for in my worldbuilding is consistency.  I'd like to be able to introduce new concepts without contradicting existing principles.  Or alternatively, if something is introduced which appears to be a contradiction, then I want that to appear to be a big deal, since a new thing of that nature should cause characters to be shocked and unsure what to believe or think.  I sometimes discard ideas which don't seem to be consistent with the setting.

On the other hand, cool and "wild" ideas can still work if they are integrated well into the underlying concepts.  Here's another plot hook that I use in a past campaign which I was happy with, so hopefully you can help me evaluate whether it fits well into the setting.  This was the follow up to the backstory of Kitsuki Fu, an NPC in a previous campaign:

Eight centuries ago, there was a tsukai who lived in the forest east of the Shrine of Perfect Contentment, in what is now the Takaba falconry preserve. Masayoshi (the monk who is the Bearer of the Golden Seal of Amaterasu) suspects that Takaba was this tsukai’s name, because this was the name of the forest before it became a preserve for falcons, and the origin of that name has been lost while most other names from the region can be found in the Daidoji histories.

Takaba lived centuries before Hantei Iuchiban became the first bloodspeaker, and thus he had no way to conceal the Shadowlands taint that his witchcraft brought into his body. However, the Emperor’s subjects were less vigorous in prosecuting tsukai in those days, so Takaba was able to practice his craft in the solitude of the forest. He was sometimes sought out by peasants and samurai alike who desired his aid.

One day he found that his obsidian knife had disappeared. He performed dark divinations to discern its whereabouts, and tracked it to a nearby village, where it was hidden in the barn of a farmer. The farmer denied having stolen the knife, and Takaba believed the denial, confident that such a man wouldn’t dare steal from him.

When Takaba returned to his forest cottage, he found that his silver chalice was missing, despite the wards and underworld guards he had set upon his home. He immediate worked to strengthen the wards and summon additional dark entities to watch over his house. However, when he returned from finding his chalice in another barn of another farmer, his obsidian knife had again been stolen.

Takaba set about studying the ways of wards and traps, experimenting with different principles and practices to fortify the protections he had set. Still, every time he left to recover a stolen object, he would find another possession missing.

This continued for years, as Takaba drove himself to master the art of warding. One day he returned and found that one of his magical snares had succeeded in catching the fox which had been burgling his home. However, even after years of offenses, Takaba could not hate the fox, who had only been acting according to her playful and mischievous nature. She offered him “a fox’s promise” that that if he let her go, she would never trouble him again.

Takaba knew what a fox’s promise was worth, but he still set her free, unable to bring himself to harm her.

The fox continued to burgle Takaba, and he continued to try to thwart her. In their battle of wits, Takaba would sometimes succeed in trapping the fox, and she would sometimes succeed in stealing his implements only to abandon them elsewhere for him to recover. As their contest continued, the two of them reached new pinnacles of mastery of their crafts. Takaba became the greatest practitioner of wards and bindings that has ever lived, and the fox became the most accomplished of any of her kind in the ways of stealth and shapechanging. Takaba would ward his cottage such that naught but air and light could enter or leave, and the fox would change herself into a gentle breeze carried upon the moonlight. Takaba would forge an unbreakable snare which would bind a leg and prevent the leg from changing into anything else, and the fox would shift into a five-legged creature and chew off her now-extra leg to escape unharmed.

As this continued over the years, the two of them fell in love, and had many children together. Some of their human descendants continue practicing maho witchcraft in the Daidoji domain to this day, while their fox descendants continue to play tricks on farmers and travelers in the Daidoji countryside.

One day Takaba had a brilliant insight – even not knowing the true name of his fox-wife, he could nevertheless construct a ward that would bind any intruder, not by their physical form, but by pinning their name itself. And so his fox-wife was trapped, and unlike all of Takaba’s other successes, which she was able to eventually outwit, this one seemed insurmountable. Takaba’s ward seemed to be based on principles which were unchallengeable in their power over that which was bound.

Eventually the fox had an idea of her own. She stole into her husband’s cottage, and after being pinned by her own name, she chewed her name off from her very self. Such a thing should not be possible – even people who give their names to bloodspeakers are still connected to that name, and this connection remains even after death. A thing without a name literally cannot exist in this realm, which is why oni require names in order to be summoned.

Still, while all known principle and doctrine declare this impossible, the fox succeeded. But having overcome the final ward which could ever trouble her, she was now without a name, and so she began to fade away, becoming less and less herself. No longer truly a fox, she was becoming something else. As this happened, her hunger increased, and she found herself consuming the very essences of the foods she sought to eat.

Eventually Takaba realized that it was names that his wife hungered for, so he began to feed her the unused names he had taken as payment for the years of his practice. But the small names of peasants proved insufficient to satiate his wife’s savage hunger, so he fed her larger and larger names. As he did so he turned his research towards how to bind one of these names to her permanently, in order to replace her true name which had been lost. He swore by all his power that she would be restored and that her suffering as the Nameless One would cease.

In the course of his research, Takaba tried to record the names he had fed to his wife to understand what satisfied the most, and how big a name had to be in order to temporarily sate her hunger. He quickly found that he could no longer remember any name once it was fed to her, and any written record of that name quickly became blurred and illegible. Further inquiry revealed that living people whose names were eaten in this way were themselves forgotten, even by their closest family. By consuming their names, Takaba’s fox-wife had severed their connection to the world, dropping their souls into the underworld without even the memories of that life, forgotten by the world itself.

Takaba eventually devised a ritual that he believed would restore her to her previous form, but it would require a name larger than any he possessed, including his own. He set about to use the last of his resources to ambush Yasuki Kiringu, the daimyo of the Yasuki family, which was still part of the Crane clan at that time, as he returned from a trip to Kyuden Daidoji.

With Kiringu’s name eaten, the world continued with his brother Yasuki Tsanumi as the Yasuki daimyo. Indeed, the world continued as if Tsanumi himself had always been the daimyo, with no one remembering that Kiringu had ever been born. Tsanumi was much angrier at the Crane clan for their lack of support than his brother had been – Kiringu had taken the ruling on heretical farming practices in stride and valued long-term stability more than responding to loss and insult. However, with Tsanumi as daimyo, the Yasuki seceded from the Crane clan and joined the Crab clan, to the shock of the whole Empire.

The Emperor’s most talented advisors and soothsayers were caught off guard. Not only had his political advisors been confident that the Yasuki would avoid such drastic action, even the Emperor’s prophets had been unable to see this coming. Apparently the changes to the world caused by the feasts of the Nameless One stand above prophecy itself, affecting the world’s futures in ways even they cannot perceive. The Hantei immediately dispatched members of the Order of Amaterasu to investigate how such a thing could have happened.

Takaba meanwhile was able to perform his final ritual, sacrificing his own life and name to bind his soul to the soul of his wife, uniting the two of them into a single being. This ritual was powered by the name of the Yasuki daimyo, and for a time it seemed that it had succeeded. The fox was once again able to walk through the Takaba forest, even as the world forgot her husband for whom it was named, and she began to remember that she was a fox. However, while this ritual had done more than any names fed to her, it too faded over time and her hunger eventually began to return.

It is unknown how she was trapped by the Emperor’s agents. A prison for the Nameless One was built in the Forgotten Tomb, but no one knows who could have constructed such a thing. Her prison could hold only a soul with no connections to any names, and the principles by which that is even possible were only later discovered by the Emperor's wisest smiths by examining the construction of this special prison. It seems clear that whoever succeeded in imprisoning her was eaten in the process, possibly having sacrificed themselves to ensure the success of their endeavor. Their sacrifice is commemorated in secret by the Order of Amaterasu, though the name or names of whoever is responsible can never be known.

Several years ago, Moto Tsume led an attack on the Forgotten Tomb, attempting to enter it through its entrance in Yomi, the realm of the honored dead. He failed, retreating with his forces in tatters, the honored ancestors who guard the tomb emerging victorious. However, his spiritual assault sent dark energies of death into the Forgotten Tomb, rocking its foundations, and weakening the prison for the Nameless One enough for her to escape.

She first ate a legionnaire at Beiden Pass, who was tracked by Kitsuki Fu. She ate a few others as she regained her strength, eventually making her way home to the Takaba falconry preserve, where she ate the County Magistrate of Kanto in the province of Akishi. Daidoji Maku subsequently replaced him, with no one having any memory of his predecessor.

As a servant of Yozo, the fortune of legal justice, Masayoshi has tracked her this far, learning much of the story of how she came to exist from her descendants among the foxes and bloodspeakers of the Daidoji domain. He has struck a bargain with them to work together for the common purpose of finally putting their ancestor to rest. The bloodspeakers provided a powerful artifact of great name to act as bait, while the foxes set to work searching for the telltale signs of a life had fallen out of the world to locate someone those close to someone she had replaced.

The PCs were the only people found who perfectly fit the criteria of people most suitable for battling the Nameless One. They were lightly connected to the previous county magistrate of Kanto, having served him for only a few months before he was eaten. They later became close friends with Maku. That combination of being connected with weak-but-still-present ties to someone eaten and strong ties to someone who “replaced” that person was ideal for warding them against being eaten themselves, though the danger would still be great.

Masayoshi set wards and traps around a totem of great name provided by the bloodspeakers of the Daidoji domain. He knew his wards and traps could only delay rather than ensnare the Nameless One, who laughed at traps even in the days when she was merely a clever fox. But they would stall her long enough for the PCs to confront her and cleave away the names she had eaten, allowing her soul to finally descend into the underworld and continue on its journey through the cycle of death and rebirth.

Everything I just wrote was the setup to a supernatural adventure which I was happy with.  I did have some concerns about how some of the details violated existing lore or established principles of the setting.  Consistency is key, however I hoped that by making the violations so shocking in-universe, it would emphasize that the general principles of the world stand, but that sometimes things still occur which are beyond our understanding.  Hopefully this indicates not that established doctrines and principles are wrong, but rather than human understanding of them is incomplete, and supposedly "impossible" things are still possible (but extremely rare), such as the existence of a Nameless Fox, or her actions evading the Sight of the Emperor's most gifted prophets.

The generic term I use for things like dream quests are "spirit encounters", since it not only encompasses dreams, but also certain types of supernatural battles, such as the fight to permanently put the Nameless One to rest.

Here's a little more information from my notes on Spirit Encounters, which I hope will help provide context for future work when I ask you to help me generate content.

Spirit encounters are divided into “scenes”. Much like scenes from a dream, the PCs will usually understand where they are and have some sense of what’s happening around them, even if they don’t remember how they specifically arrived in their current location or how they could get back to it later. Scenes are divided into rounds – sometimes a scene will last until an objective is completed, an other times a scene will last for a predefined number of rounds.

Every character takes a single action each round. In the first round of a scene, each PC chooses a single physical ring: Water, Fire, Earth, or Air. The round progresses through those rings in that order. Spirit encounters are turbulent, and PCs take ongoing damage as the encounter continues, though this damage depends on which Ring is chosen.

→ Water: these actions always include the “evaluate options” action, which helps the party discern what actions they have available to them. It’s advisable for someone in the party to take this action early in an encounter. Other Water actions let the PCs influence the scene directly. A PCs who chooses the Path of Water automatically takes 5 damage per round, in addition to any additional wounds taken by the action they choose.

→ Fire: these actions are the most directly effective, but also the most dangerous. They always include things which directly accomplish the goals of the scene, but you take the most damage. People who choose the Path of Fire add an extra die to their pool of rolled dice, and automatically set that die to a 10, which is then rerolled as normal, but also takes 10 damage in addition to any wounds taken from the action they choose.

→ Earth: these actions have their rolls divided in half, making them less effective than other rolls, and sometimes may only give bonuses to someone else’s action rather than directly accomplishing anything. However, these actions tend to cause less damage to the person who takes them, and people who choose the Path of Earth take no automatic damage.

→ Air: these actions usually react to what others are doing, whether that means giving more information about the scene, reducing damage dealt to another PC, or boosting their roll like an Earth action would. Players who choose the Path of Air take 5 damage if they take an action, however since Air is the final element to resolve its actions a player who chooses this path may choose to forgo their action and take no damage.

PCs choose their elemental path at the beginning of the round, but they are not required to choose the specific action within that path until their turn. Thus, PCs acting in later paths may use information gained in the earlier paths to inform their decision of which action to take.

At the end of each round, players choose the path they take on the next round, with one restriction: they may choose any ring other than the one "opposing" their path on the previous round. In other words, someone who chose the Path of Water may choose any path other than the Path of Fire for the next round. The exception is that any PC may choose the Path of Void to go to an opposite ring (e.g. Air to Earth) – if they do this then the skills they roll will be chosen randomly.  This randomness could hurt, but it could also help by enabling a PC to choose an action which uses skills they don't possess, and allowing them to count on the randomness of the Path of Void to hopefully increase their chances of success.

The idea above is to incorporate the various underlying concepts behind the 5 rings into these rules.  The references to "damage" and "wounds" is spiritual rather than physical, and is what I meant when I talked about impairing someone psychically to raise the stakes.

There's an additional type of damage which can be taken in Spirit Encounters, which is that of "connection damage".  For example, in one dream quest from a past campaign, the PCs found themselves in the Court of the Caliph of Medin al Salaat.  After gaining information in previous scenes, they had the option to exit the dream safely, or proceed to the third and final scene, in which the Caliph and her factions were eating dinner.  Here was a description I wrote of that scene:

It is said in Medin al Salaat that it takes 4 people to prepare a salad.  A generous person to add the oil, a stingy person to add the vinegar, a wise person to add the salt, and a fool to mix them all together.

Here you can see that the Caliph is the generous person, offering not only her hospitality but immense material support to the Uru in their conflict with the Moto.  The Dahab are stingy, in the way that merchants often are - while they are the main source of the money which is funding the Uru, they wish to know the use to which the Uru will put it.  The Old Man of the Mountain is the wise man here, advising the Uru and Caliph alike, and ensuring that the Houses of Dahab get the answers that will keep their coffers open.  And as for the Uru... considering how they have found themselves thrust into a losing war which seems to benefit everyone except themselves, it would be difficult to ascribe to them any role but that of the fool.

If the PCs chose to enter this scene, they knew that they would no longer be risking "skill damage" of the sort that Kuni Isamu took, but rather "connection damage" which strikes at the ties that bind them together with other people and groups.  Instead of simply learning about secrets and wisdom, they have the opportunity to directly affect the waking world on a spiritual level but disrupting the relationships between people and groups, at the risk of having their own connections damaged.

PCs who enter the scene and choose the Path of Water are able to strike at the Caliph's connections to her subjects, weakening the ties that bind her to one or more of the following:
-> the "outsider" factions such as the Ashalan, the Rashari, and the Khayal
-> the Qabal of the Sahir, who are famously apolitical and therefore have no direct loyalty to her, but who could still support or undermine her in various ways
-> her khadi retainers - it is unknown what exactly ties them together, but weaking these ties could prove most useful if Moto Gaheris eventually lays siege to this city

However, PCs who take a serious wound while in the Path of Water will find their own connections damaged, specifically those which tie them to their Clan.  What would it mean for such connections to be damaged?  Their family might find themselves thinking less of them, their clan-mates might suddenly hold them in less regard, their lineage might turn its back on them for small infractions.  This is the general idea behind the concept of "connection damage".

PCs taking the Path of Fire have the opportunity to disrupt the connections that bind the Uru together, including:
-> Timur Beg and his ties to Eguden Yeke - weakening this could cause the Eguden "ailay" ("tribe" - analogous to a Rokugani "lineage") to perhaps cease supporting the ruling Timur lineage
-> Timur Beg and his ties to Perhat Bugra - the Perhat tribe has continued to fiercely resist the Moto even after multiple devastating defeats, and if their connection to the ruling Timur was weakened then they would be more inclined to finally surrender once and for all rather than continue fighting in the war
-> Timur Beg and Caliph Hanan Talibah - this could go in both directions - Hanan Talibah could cease supporting the Uru and/or the Uru themselves might decide that their loyalty to the Caliphate which has supported them has been paid back in full by the blood they have already spilled, and that there is no need to further throw their lives away against the armies of the Moto

However, PCs who take the Path of Fire risk damaging their own connections to the Moto.  They have had to work hard to get the Moto to respect them and to not simply be viewed as untrustworthy outsiders.  If these connections were damaged, months of hard work and great accomplishments could be unraveled.

Anyway, there were also options for the paths of Earth and Air, but I figure that's enough context.  I mainly wanted to list those things as example of this concept of "connection damage".  In Rokugan, the Fortunes themselves are composed of the cycles and connections which make up the rhythm of the world and which connect and perpetuate the people and things in it, and this a person's connections in the right circumstances can be a vulnerable target which sometimes may be be directly attacked.

One thing that I tried to highlight to my players about the concept of "connection damage" is that while it is very real, it would be difficult to convince someone who was skeptical that the effect was actually happening, because the effects would be subtle.

For example, consider someone who had suffered connection damage that weakened the ties that bind them to their clan.  This happened to one of my PCs, Bayushi Saburo - other members of the Scorpion Clan were much more inclined to try to take vengeance in response to words or actions which they perceived as insults or betrayals.  And they were far more likely to interpret his behavior in this way.

For example, during the Battle of Coward's Torment, Saburo and the platoon under his command was heavily wounded.  As the acting lieutenant of his platoon, he was in the process of pulling his unit back into the reserves so that a fresh platoon could take his place on the front lines.

However, as he was doing so, he spotted a fellow Scorpion from a different company, Shosuro Yuzo, who had gotten separated from their squad.  She was also wounded and had fallen off her horse, and enemy forces were advancing on her.  Saburo had to decide whether to save her or continue pulling back.  He chose the latter, and Yuzo was killed.

This could have inspired harsh feelings under the best of circumstances, though as a military commander Saburo has great standing, authority, and expertise with which to argue that his actions were for the greater good of the unit and helped ensure their ultimate success in battle, and that it would have created an unacceptable risk for his army if he had broken ranks to save Yuzo.

However, because of the connection damage he suffered in his dream quest in the Court of the Caliph, his fellow Scorpion went far beyond petty forms of retaliation and instead began plotting a revenge which would discredit and publicly humiliate Saburo.

With all of that being said, note how subtle this effect is.  While the connection damage really did have a significant effect, if Saburo tried to convince someone that he was only being targeted because of the connection damage he suffered in his dream quest, this would be nearly impossible to prove.  He really did "abandon" a comrade to die in battle, and it's quite understandable that Yuzo's family might seek revenge for this, so nothing that happened as a result appears supernatural - it would all seem to an outside observer like the normal consequences of regular life in the 1st Imperial Legion.

This theme is something I've tried to create throughout my worldbuilding, where supernatural things are very real, but their effect is subtle, and often it can be difficult or impossible to tell someone's superstitions from a real event or effect.

I try to draw a lot of inspiration from these kinds of real-world stories, where claims of the supernatural may have gone unquestioned in the culture where they were made, but where skeptical historians might look back and conclude that nothing supernatural had happened.  This is often true even for historians who themselves believe or are open to the possibility of the supernatural.  Just because such things might exist doesn't mean that real-life scholars do (or should) take claims made in primary source historical documents at face value.

Consider the case of of Doji no Tsume Toyohiro, a legionnaire in the 1st Imperial legion:

Toyohiro distinguished himself in military service during the Lion/Crane war in the northern front. In particular, he commanded a company that repeled a group of tunnelers who were trying to literally undermine the walls of Kyuden Tsume itself. Most of his comrades died, and Toyohiro frequently sees both them and sometimes his opponents as he goes about his day.

Lately he’s taken to following where they lead, listening to what they have to say, and speaking with them. This has frequently taken him into the 6th Battalion, but the Lion have ultimately decided that he is the only Crane allowed to wander freely through their territory, because anyone who struck him down or even interfered with his journey might find themselves haunted by the same ghosts which pull him along. Matsu no Moyu Kazushi visited each Lion company to counsel this policy of non-interference, though he has suffered some mockery from non-Lion companies as a result.

Note how Toyohiro is seeing ghosts which other people do not see.  This plays upon themes I emphasize regarding ambiguity of the supernatural.  Tsume Toyohiro seeing ghosts which no one else sees could be interpreted as someone who isn't even haunted, but who has hallucinations due to what a modern person might diagnose as PTSD.  I've read that Roman legionnaires were sometimes described as being haunted by the ghosts of their former comrades - this doesn't fit the definition of modern PTSD as described in the DSM, but it does sound very much like a trauma response.

If a modern reader read a historical account of a real person with a story like Toyohiro's, then even if that modern person believed that ghosts exist, they might have cause to doubt that this historical figure was really haunted.  Nevertheless, while some people in the setting might wonder about whether every single once of Toyohiro's experiences is legitimate, few in Rokugan would dare to dismiss his wanderings, and it would be reasonable for other legionnaires to fear the prospect of becoming haunted if they interfered with his work.

Toyohiro has additionally sworn this vow to help himself in his ministry towards the ghosts which he sees:

"In the sight of Emma-O, Fortune of Death, and King Yan, the Judge of Souls, I, Doji no Tsume Toyohiro, swear a solemn vow. I am haunted by the spirits of my fallen comrades and opponents who met their ends during the Lion/Crane war, their souls trapped in unrest. I hear their voices and see their spectral forms, and I understand their struggle to find peace.

Thus, I swear to serve as their voice, their advocate, and their guide. I vow to listen to their tales, understand their plights, and offer comfort to their lingering spirits. I promise to do all that is within my power to help them make their passage from the realm of the mortal to the underworld, where they rightfully belong.

May Emma-O lend me the wisdom and the strength to honor this vow, and may he show mercy and provide guidance to the souls who have been lost in the tumult of war. For as long as I draw breath, I will not falter in this sacred duty. This I swear."

Even people who do not fear ghosts might worry about the prospect of interfering with his work after he swore that vow, because to do so might antagonize Emma-O or King Yan.  The particular effects of doing this might not be immediately apparent, but could anyone ever really be sure that this wouldn't bring future disaster?  This is an important type of ambiguity - most people would agree that interfering with such vows could bring misfortune, but it would be difficult for anyone to make specific predictions about what form this misfortune might take.

Or we could go back to the story of Otaku Mirai, another officer in the 1st Imperial legion:

Starting the night of his gempukku, Mirai was tormented in dreams by a mujina. This curse followed him to his first assignment as a sergeant in the 1st Imperial legion. At times he would go weeks without being able to sleep through the night.

One evening, an old man appeared in the Mirai’s dreams, identifying himself as the spirit of a neglected sword. Shockingly, the man was a gaijin who named himself Heartseeker. The old man additionally stated that he was unable to leave his scabbard as he had been defiled by dirty human hands. Most importantly, the spirit told Mirai that should he wish to permanently rid himself of the hateful mujina, he should clean the blade of its rust.

Mirai tracked down all of the gaijin swords in the legion, of which there were many, and identified and acquired Heartseeker from captain Otaku Hiyu, who had left it languishing in a crate of old antiques not considered worthy of display. It had originally been taken from a slain gaijin bandit many centuries ago.

Desperate to be able to sleep well again, Mirai carefully cleaned the blade. As he finished his eyes fell upon the decorative leg of a brazier in his room. In the flickering light it suddenly resembled the imp in his dreams! The freshly cleansed sword then moved by itself to lop off that decorative leg, thus freeing Mirai from his nightly torment.

Mirai carries this sword with him at all times, strapped to his back in the manner of a barbarian. When in his tent it occupies a place of honor at a shrine he has built for it back at camp, but he never travels without it. Being a courtier and thus not able to duel, he has taken to practicing with it and has developed his own fighting style. He has spoken of plans to eventually make a warriors pilgrimage to join Moto Gaheris’ army to better learn its techniques and adapt to other more civilized weapons, though many doubt that he will follow through on such plans, as many take this as the boastful talk of a teenager.

This is based on a real historical anecdote, but modern readers might not read that anecdote and think that a sword was really haunted by an imp.  Rather, they might believe that someone had a strange dream, then saw something in the flickering shadows, then thought that they had defeated some supernatural force, and then that belief was self-reinforcing and so he found himself no longer worried about being afflicted and was therefore no longer afflicted.

Even someone in Rokugan, who certainly believes that supernatural things exist, might doubt the accuracy of Mirai's story.

Or consider the story of Kakita Korihime:

Korihime is the daughter of Kakita Yariga, who was the executioner to Kakita Toshimo. She took up her father’s role as executioner, but found herself unusually susceptible to hauntings. After performing only a handful of executions, she took a demotion in order to serve as a platoon lieutenant in the 1st Imperial legion.

As far as she knows, all of the vengeful ghosts who were previously haunted her eventually made their way into Jigoku, and she reports no sightings after arriving at Chai Sedo, though she spends a considerable amount of the week of the Bon Festival in the temple.

Note that in this account, it's also unclear whether anyone else has seen the ghosts that haunted Korihime.  Indeed, a plausible explanation is that she spent some time as the executioner for the Kakita daimyo and found it so traumatic that she suffered psychological issues as a result, which manifested as her believing herself to be haunted.  Then when she moved to the other side of the Empire to take a new post where she was no longer forced to perform executions, her issues subsided and she was no longer "haunted".

I'm not saying that these mundane explanations are what is "really" happening in Rokugan.  Ghosts definitely do exist in Rokugan.  However, a theme that I have tried to cultivate when it comes to the supernatural is that some apparently supernatural things are real, some are just people being superstitious, and it's incredibly difficult to tell which is which.

One of the things I would like you to help with in my worldbuilding, in addition to generating vows, is generating supposedly "magic" items or helping craft supposedly supernatural backstories for NPCs.  And one of the most important qualities in that writing is ambiguity.

Here's the backstory for the famous sword Yamaoroshi:

The origins of this sword are unknown. Its known history begins with Mirumoto Tsuki, who was part of the army that defeated the Maw at the Battle of the Cresting Wave. Her own sword destroyed, she pulled the sword of a fallen comrade out of the Maw’s hide. The sword seemed to move under its own power, hacking and slicing into the Maw, especially when striking from west to east. When the final coordinated strike from the remaining warriors finally slew the Maw, Tsuki was the only member of the Dragon clan to help deal the killing blow.

She named the sword Yamaoroshi – “Wind Blowing Down the Mountain”. As the sword that slew the Maw, it gained great renown, and 150 years later made its way into the hands of a duelist named Mirumoto Tetsushi, who used it to defeat Kakita Senri, chief instructor of the Kakita dueling academy. Already an underdog in the fight, Tetsushi chose to face east into the morning sun, practically blinding him in the garden where they fought. Yet he emerged victorious, explaining afterwards that just as the Wind Blows Down the Mountain, so too does this sword desire to be striking in the direction from higher elevation to lower elevation, even when its wielder is standing on flat ground.

Yamaoroshi later became the family sword of Agasha Shigeaki, one of the companions of Agasha Kitsuki, and struck down several of the assassins bent on murdering Mirumoto Januko, the daimyo of the Mirumoto family when the Unicorn returned. Agasha Kitsuki was granted his own Family name, and so Shigeaki then became Kitsuki Shigeaki, and Yamaoroshi has stayed with the Kitsuki family ever since.

Note that this is sword is steeped in history and is many centuries old, and it is believed to not only benefit from excellent craftsmanship in its manufacture, but that the weight of its past deeds and accomplishments grants its wielder an almost supernatural advantage.

On the other hand... there aren't really any testable claims being made about the sword, exactly.  Even the explanation that the sword has a will to be striking "downhill" would be difficult to measure or prove.  Someone performing katas with the sword might say something like, "oh yes, I can certainly feel the sword's will and the way in which swinging it towards a lower elevation grants me additional strength, as it adds the weight of its desire to my strikes".  But that could easily just be the power of suggestion!

Again, my point here is not to suggest that the claims about the sword are wrong.  Perhaps they are correct!  But the crucial thing is that the claims are ambiguous enough that it's difficult to be sure.

As another example, consider a supposedly cursed item: the Armor of Fool's Regret, which is in the possession of Ikoma Akaho, a platoon lieutenant in the 6th battalion of the 1st Imperial legion.

The Armor of Fool’s Regret is a cursed suit of armor possessed by a kansen (usually an elemental spirit which has been corrupted by its own anger or some past wrong or circumstance) which has been in Akaho’s family’s possession for centuries. It has been determined that to destroy the armor would free the kansen to wreak havoc elsewhere. And when the kansen is not “fed” it grows angry and reaches out to cause mischief in its surroundings.

However, those who wear the armor (when the kansen is well-fed) are protected by the kansen’s presence. Wearers of this armor have never (yet) fallen in battle, even when suffering grievous wounds.

The kansen demands blood, and specifically hungers for being worn while the wearer is injured. Akaho’s platoon is therefore the dumping ground for troublemakers, and its members are punished by being beaten while wearing the armor. Those transferred to the platoon are beaten this way as an initiation. When a long enough time goes by without any disciplinary actions being required, members of the platoon take turns donning the armor and being struck to appease the bloodlust of the armor's kansen inhabitant.

While some new recruits suggest that the armor should be destroyed, this is rarely a good idea with cursed items, as that would let its resident spirit loose in the world to cause mischief elsewhere, with there no longer being any convenient way to keep it bound.

As before, there are strong, specific claims being made about the armor.  And yet the actual evidence is quite thin - the fact that the wearer of this armor has never fallen in battle doesn't prove very much, because that's true of many if not most suits of armor!

As for the kansen, even if a shugenja were to commune with the armor and determine that the will of its resident kami was indeed consumed by bloodlust... that doesn't necessarily prove that people need to don the armor and be beaten in order to appease the kansen, or that the kansen is capable of leaving its home and causing mischief out in the world.

In general, I think that what I'm describing is a version of Rokugan which is a "low fantasy" setting.  Magic and spirits and gods and the supernatural do exist in this world, but people's superstitions may often be far more common than the actual supernatural things which make those superstitions plausible.

Here are a few more supposedly magic items or cursed items which I've come up with, which I think may help provide additional examples of what I'm going for.

"The Candle of Tears": This technically refers to the candle-holder rather than candle itself.  Any candle placed in this candle-holder will find its wax dribbling down in two distinct trails, reminiscent of tear-marks on a crying face.  A grief-stricken ghost haunts this candle-holder, and as long as a candle is kept burning at all times, she will be kept satisfied.  The flame of the candle waves wildly when in the presence of a child who is in danger of dying from sickness, and The Candle of Tears is used by doctors to triage cases, but if the flame ever goes out before the candle has burned all the way through its wick, the ghost will become even more distraught and lash out at those around it.

This item is a good example of several different themes which we've discussed, which I will reiterate here:

-> Ambiguity.  The fact that the candle's wax will tend to dribble down in two distinct trails is fairly thin "proof".  Additionally, even a small breeze or change in air currents can cause any candle to have its flame "wave wildly" for a brief time, so it would be difficult to tell the difference between normal flickering and some sort of supernatural omen. 
 However, because Rokugan is a society in which people tend to accept supernatural explanations for everyday occurrences, it would be rare for someone to demand proof that the candle is really even haunted.

-> Usefulness.  There is good reason for doctors to make use of this candle.  Rokugan's medicine is primitive, so doctors have good reason to want supernatural help.

-> Necessity.  Although there is some potential downside to using this candle-holder, since a candle placed in the holder MUST be allowed to burn all the way down to prevent the ghost from lashing out, destroying the candle-holder would free the ghost which is bound to it, which would be even worse.

Not every cursed item or supernatural thing will have all of these qualities, but this is the kind of thing I tend to shoot for.





We can build on this notion of ambiguity by reviewing temple relics for the Temple of Bishamon in the city of Toshi Ranbo.  One thing to note is how each relic is incredibly impressive and is known to have many supernatural qualities, but also that there are more mundane explanations (often just "power of suggestion") for each of them!

The Order of Bishamon in Toshi Ranbo has one of the largest temples to Bishamon in the Empire. Having been established a thousand years ago, it has acquired many relics, which pilgrims travel all over the Empire to behold and pray before. Steward Iori oversees this set of temple responsibilities, which makes him one of the most revered members of the temple, in some ways more so than even Grand Abbot Goemon.

Below is a list of the major temple relics.

The Staff of Bishamon:

This is the first holy relic ever possessed by the Order of Bishamon, and may be the oldest relic of Bishamon in the entire Empire. Displayed prominently in its own special prayer hall, this intricately carved staff is made from ancient cherry wood, carved from the branch of a tree blessed by Bishamon himself. Inscribed with symbols and inscriptions of the Seven Virtues of Bushido.

Legend tells that the staff was found a thousand years ago by the temple’s first “high monk” – so called because this predates the title of Grand Abbot! “High Monk Fujita” came across the staff during a pilgrimage to the Isawa Woodlands, where it lay unclaimed beside a spring said to be touched by the gods. The monk took this as a sign of Bishamon’s blessing and brought the staff back to the temple, where it has been preserved and venerated ever since.

Supplicants commonly report feeling a deep sense of peace and courage when they meditate near the staff. In times of crisis, the staff has been known to glow faintly, allowing the temple monks to be guided by Bishamon’s wisdom and protection. In particular, monks will sit in the prayer room in worship, occasionally looking upon the staff when inspiration strikes or a moment of clarity seems to descend. If the staff has been lit up by the sun, or better yet if it seems to be generating its own light (as many have witnessed), that confirms that the thoughts and plans they were forming when they gazed upon the staff are indeed favored by Bishamon.

This is not used only by the Grand Abbot for large undertakings, but also by individuals for their own personal journeys. For example, a monk trying to decide whether to swear a vow of celibacy and advance to the rank of Senior Monk might first think upon the joys of marriage and parenthood, and then contemplate the path of the Shinsei and the contentment of the enlightened. After considering each path and praying to Bishamon for guidance, they would raise their head and open their eyes and gaze upon the staff and take not of how much light shines upon ir (or from within it, for those who have perceived such things). Bishamon is said to hide sunbeams behind a cloud when an unfavorable path is being considered, and to instead ask Lady Sun to shine more brightly when the more meritorious action is being prayed upon. Monks and samurai and pilgrims will often come to the temple begging and waiting for a chance to meditate and pray along with the staff, which focuses and attunes its accuracy and calibration.

The Pillar of Ten Thousand Names:

Rising majestically within the expansive central courtyard of the Temple of Bishamon, this monumental stone pillar is the first thing seen by visitors to the temple complex after they pass through the two statues of Bishamon which guard the temple gates.

The Pillar of Ten Thousand Names is an impressive, smooth monolith, standing at twelve feet in height. Carved meticulously onto its surface are the countless names of bushi who have valiantly fallen in battle. The most recent additions are closer to the base, while the oldest, worn down by time and elements, adorn the top. Surrounding the pillar’s foot are a series of simple stone altars where incense perpetually burns, releasing a fragrant aroma that fills the courtyard, accompanied by the gentle hum of prayers from monks and samurai in reverence.

Samurai pilgrims come to the Pillar of Ten Thousand Names before heading into battle. They kneel at its base, offering incense, while reciting prayers and mantras to Bishamon and the spirits of the departed. As they gaze up the pillar, it’s customary to touch a name and meditate upon it, seeking inspiration and guidance from that fallen warrior’s spirit. By connecting with the memories and legacies inscribed on the stone, samurai hope to call upon the valor and fortitude of those who have gone before them. Many bushi who have prayed at the pillar report the presence of ancient samurai guiding them in combat.

On quiet nights, some hear faint whispers around the pillar. This happens most frequently after a battle in which those who have prayed before the pillar have died, as the spirits whose names are engraved on the pillar welcome the fallen dead into their ranks.

Prayer Beads of the Guardian Spirits:

This set of 108 prayer beads is carefully crafted from polished jade, each attuned to a particular guardian spirit revered by the temple reveres. These spirits are a combination of elemental kami, celestial benefactors, major/minor Fortunes, and especially bodisatva. The association of each bead with its patron is well-documented in temple records, though supplicants are not usually told of particulars before they pray, so that they may make use of the prayer beads open to the guidance of any guardian spirit rather than focusing on only 1 single target.

The beads are strung together with a durable silk thread, each bead separated by a small knot, allowing monks and pilgrims to easily move from one bead to the next during their prayers. While at a glance, every bead seems uniform, upon closer inspection, each bead is subtly unique (though almost perfectly identical in size), hinting at the individuality of the spirits they symbolize.

When one prays and meditates with the Prayer Beads of the Guardian Spirit, certain beads may change in temperature, becoming noticeably warmer or even chillingly cold to the touch. Alternatively, individual beads may feel significantly larger to the touch, or in rare cases appear missing when passing the beads through the hands, only to reappear as soon as the supplicant gazes upon the prayer beads.

These variations signify the messages and warnings of the guardian spirits. Monks are trained to take note of the beads that stand out during their prayers, recording their numbers to later consult the temple’s extensive manuals. These manuals, which have been maintained and updated over countless generations, contain interpretations of the various combinations of beads that might react.

Pilgrims who are granted the privileged of praying with these prayer beads are tested to ensure that they can keep an accurate count of the beads, as they are expected to touch each bead and note any variations. If a poorly educated pilgrim couldn’t say for sure whether an anomaly occurred at the 78th or 79th bead then the prayer beads would be wasted on them.

The Sword of the First Vow:

Also know as the Sword of the Vanquished Warlord, this sword rests prominently on a stone pedestal within a chamber adorned with hanging silk tapestries depicting the heroic feats of the original Akodo Damasu.

The blade reflects an ancient design and is made from beaten rather than folded steel. A serene blue tassel is affixed to the pommel, intricately woven from the hair of the warlord’s betrothed, who tragically passed before their union could be sealed. A bronze guard, etched with the dynamic dance of two koi fish, completes the sword.

This sword did not belong to the revered Akodo Damasu but rather to his most formidable adversary – a warlord whose very name has been struck from the Akodo histories as a punishment for his refusal to join with Lord Akodo. In a pivotal battle, Akodo Damasu triumphed over the warlord and took the sword as a symbol of his victory.

Within his personal journal, discovered posthumously, Damasu revealed a profound ambivalence about his continued loyalty to Lord Akodo, considering the option of consolidating his power within the safety of the stronghold rather than riding off to additional wars in the west. Before the sworn of his defeated enemy, his journal reveals that he mustered the courage to swear a secret vow to Bishamon, resolving to channel all his might and spirit into upholding his allegiance to Lord Akodo, never allowing his resolve to falter. He swore this vow in secret, not wanting to reveal in life that he had struggled over the question of loyalty to his daimyo.

Those preparing for a duel or any significant challenge come to the chamber to draw inspiration from Akodo Damasu’s determination and to offer their prayers to Damasu, Bishamon, Lord Akodo, and/or their ancestors. They kneel in the sword’s presence, either making their silent prayer or, should they choose, swear a secret vow upon it.

Given the sanctity of the ritual, the vow—if sworn—is never spoken aloud. Instead, emulating the original Akodo Damasu, the supplicant may only (if they so choose) write their promise, sealing it away to be discovered posthumously. Legend holds that those whose vows come to light prematurely are doomed to see their intentions thwarted.

While no overt power radiates from the sword, those who have silently sworn (or even just prayed) in its presence often describe a newfound clarity and inner fire driving them forward. In duels that permit submission, achieving victory is the most frequent aim of these secret vows. Implicit in such a pledge is an unwavering resolve, even if it means meeting one’s end in the quest for that victory.

The Helm of Discerning Valor:

Resting upon an ornate pedestal of carved ebony wood, within a chamber softly illuminated by lantern light, is a helm of striking distinction. Constructed from burnished bronze, its design is inspired by the dance between patience and action. The helm’s ridge portrays a serene landscape, symbolizing moments of calm deliberation and strategic waiting. In contrast, the faceplate intricately details a roaring tempest with infantry soldiers charging forward in a decisive moment of action. An emerald-tinted plume, a beacon of leadership and unity, rises proudly from the helm’s crest, subtly shimmering in the chamber’s ambient light.

The Helm of Discerning Valor was commissioned to honor Akodo Kaizen, a revered infantry commander of the Lion Clan. In a time of great strife during the era of the Gozoku, the Crane Clan laid siege to Toshi Ranbo. With the city’s walls under relentless assault and victory for the Crane seeming inevitable, Akodo Kaizen discerned the perfect moment to sally forth, leading a charge that shattered the Crane’s forces scaling the city walls, turning the tide of the siege and cementing his legacy.

After this legendary defense, the helm was crafted in recognition of his brilliant tactics. Over time, as Akodo Kaizen’s descendants drew strength and insight from it, the helm became revered beyond the Akodo family, eventually earning its place as a sacred relic within the Temple of Bishamon.

On the brink of leading their infantry into battle, military commanders come to the chamber to invoke Akodo Kaizen’s strategic genius. With permission from the Custodian of the Sacred Relics (currently Steward Iori), a commander dons the helm. As they kneel, they silently meditate, seeking clarity on when to exercise patience and when to charge with unwavering might.

Connecting with the helm, commanders endeavor to absorb the essence of Akodo Kaizen’s discernment, hoping to emulate his understanding of the delicate balance between waiting and action on the battlefield. Infantry troops often recount tales of their leaders emerging from the chamber with newfound clarity and resolve. On the battlefield, commanders who have invoked the helm’s wisdom are said to possess an unparalleled intuition, making decisions that often defy conventional tactics yet lead to remarkable victories.

The Eternal Wisdom Tree:

In the tranquility of the Gardens of Reflection (a prayer garden within the temple complex) stands the Eternal Wisdom Tree, a direct descendant of the tree under which the Shinsei himself once taught. Its sprawling, ancient branches and deep roots are a living embodiment of spiritual connection and endurance.

Those who meditate under its shade receive whispers of wisdom and are blessed with a calm spirit and a mind sharpened for insight and understanding. Warriors often seek its peace before battle, hoping for mental clarity and guidance in the conflicts to come. The tree also symbolizes steadfastness and stability, embodying the unwavering strength of the spiritual path.

The Chamber of Celestial Echoes:

Deep within the heart of the temple complex lies a room that resonates with an otherworldly aura. While the temple has many ancient holy relics, the Chamber of Celestial Echoes is the temple’s crown jewel. Its entrance is framed by intricately carved arches that depict celestial beings in harmonious dance with samurai and monks, a symbol of the divine interplay between the mortal and immortal realms.

As one steps into the chamber, the outside world seems to fade away. Many pilgrims hear the gentle, omnipresent hum when they are worthy and prepared to hear the echoes of Lady Sun’s far-off celestial choir. This ethereal sound emanates from the very walls, which are adorned with golden frescoes that tell stories of Bishamon’s valor and benevolence.

Dominating the center of the chamber is a raised dais, upon which sits a series of platforms and containers, each nested within the other. Each level is guarded by intricately carved statues of celestial beings, animals, and legendary samurai.

Outer Platform: The largest and first platform is shaped in a perfect circle and made of deep green jade. Golden inlays form patterns of clouds, and at the cardinal points are bronze statues of protective tigers, their ever-watchful eyes inlaid with shimmering jade.

Second Platform: Resting atop the first, this hexagonal platform is constructed of polished obsidian, catching and reflecting the dim light of the room in unpredictable patterns. Surrounding this platform are statues of six revered monks, each holding a different symbolic item: a staff, a scroll, a lotus, a bell, a sword, and a bowl.

Third Platform: Smaller still, this platform is triangular and made of pure, translucent crystal. It seems to glow from within, casting gentle prisms around the room. Guarding this platform are three celestial ki-rin. These are not the ki-rin of the Unicorn clan, but the celestial ki-rin of Lady Sun’s court, with the torso of a deer, the tail of an ox, the hooves of a horse, and wings outspread, each bearing a sapphire in its beak.

Final Container: Upon the crystal platform rests the Vault of Celestial Echoes, a meticulously crafted reliquary made of silver and gold. Intricate designs of dragons and phoenixes dance around its surface, intertwined in a complex, mesmerizing pattern. Its lid, though unsealed, is heavy and bears a single golden lotus at its center, symbolizing purity and divine connection.

The Reliquary: Inside the Vault of Celestial Echoes, visible only to those who dare lift the lid, is the inner reliquary. Fashioned from pale, iridescent pearl and adorned with a singular motif of Bishamon’s symbol, it rests upon a cushion of velvet, deep red in hue. Though it is closed, there is no lock, no seal, and it has not been opened in at least five centuries, possibly more.

Around the dais, there are always at least two monks in deep meditation. Their role is not merely physical protectors – few would dare to disturb this chamber – but as spiritual conduits, their meditations and prayers maintaining the chamber’s connection to the celestial heavens.

Although the exact contents of the inner reliquary are unknown, there is an extensive list of of artifacts which are likely held within. Although some of these may only be legends, and the exact list is said to be unknown even at the highest levels of the temple, the list supposedly includes:

- the Whispering Crystal
- a fragment of the Shield of Resolve
- the Vial of Bishamon’s Vigor
- Breath of the Divine Wind
- Bishamon’s Solemn Knot
- the Orb of Hallowed Visions
- the Celestial Quill
- the Warrior’s Heartbeat
- Tears of the Sunlit Path

Stolen Relics:

The Tsume family held the city of Toshi Ranbo for 3 years. After they took the city, they plundered it for its treasures, including the Temple of Bishamon’s stored coinage, amounting to many thousands of koku.

After the initial attempt by the Akodo to retake the city failed, the Tsume went a step further and took several of the temple’s relics, which they transported to other temples in Crane lands. They also plundered numerous pieces of temple artwork, as the Temple of Bishamon contains many priceless pieces of historical artwork which are not listed on this page.

The Damasu hoped that all stolen relics and artwork would be returned as part of the peace treaty negotiated at the end of the Lion/Crane war, but in his wisdom, Akodo Toturi decided to prioritize other terms and concessions from the Crane.

Below is the list of 3 relics which were taken.

The Tooth of the Shinsei:

The Shrine of Divine Light was the location which safeguarded this relic within the temple, before it was taken by the Tsume. This tooth was one of the Shinsei’s childhood teeth, kept by his mother, and recovered after his death once he had already cemented his place in history. The tooth, small and unassuming, was housed within a delicate crystal reliquary, suspended by golden chains amidst a soft, eternal light.

Pilgrims and samurai would seek guidance, wisdom, and blessings in the Shrine of Divine Light, since a prayer uttered in the presence of the tooth is said to be heard directly by the Shinsei in the celestial realms. While the relic empowered legitimate rule and righteous path-following, the Tsume broke with this when they plundered it from the temple. It has been relocated to Kyuden Doji.

The Jade Shinsei

Residing within the Shrine of Harmonious Spirit is a venerated statue crafted from a single, flawless piece of jade, depicting Shinsei in a serene, meditative pose. The statue is adorned with intricately crafted garments, which are changed three times per year in a solemn and intricate ceremony performed by “the daimyo” (previously the daimyo who ruled over Toshi Ranbo) or a designated representative.

Each garment represents a different aspect and season of life (though notable the 3 seasons do not correspond to the 4 yearly seasons): renewal and growth, abundance and prosperity, and withdrawal and introspection.

The Tsume put considerable effort into moving this statue, which is almost 9 feet tall and over 4 tons in weight. It is now located in Kyuden Tsume, and because the Jade Shinsei was considered a protector of the city and a symbol of the seasons of life, teaching acceptance and adaption to change, the Tsume believe that its presence in the city is an important reason why Kyuden Tsume never fell to protracted Lion siege.

The Chime of Harmony:

The above stolen relics are not particular to Bishamon – the Chime of Harmony is a much less significant relic, though in a sense is the most offensive to have been taken, because it is a relic specifically of Bishamon rather than of the Shinsei.

This graceful instrument was previously suspended from a stand of fine polished ebony in the window of the temple’s main prayer room. Its main body is a circular ring made from a blend of rare metals, with seven elongated, slender tines hanging from it. Every tine is engraved with symbols of protection and valor, each corresponding to a significant battle or sacrifice where Bishamon’s presence was felt.

When struck, the Chime produces a sound of crystalline clarity that seems to echo through the very walls of the temple and into the hearts of those present. However, the beauty of its sound is its subjectivity; each listener might hear a different tone. To one, the chime may resonate with a harmonious note, indicating alignment with the path of righteousness, while to another, the very same strike might sound dissonant, suggesting a need for inner reflection.

The true magic of the Chime of Harmony is not just in its sound, but in its resonance. While the clarity or dissonance of the note is subjective to each listener, the duration of its echo seems universally consistent to all listeners. A harmonious chime, indicative of right action or intent, will resonate for what feels like an eternity, while a note suggesting misalignment is said to fade more rapidly, signaling the need for reconsideration or a change of heart. Temple monks therefore would strike the chime when considering different courses of action, to determine which one will keep them on the third path of the Shinsei.

On tranquil nights, the Chime occasionally sounded of its own accord – a spontaneous offering of Bishamon’s guidance… or perhaps in some cases an expression of greater cosmic harmony. Whether moved by the hand of a monk, a pilgrim, or an unseen force, the Chime of Harmony stood as a beacon of introspection and spiritual alignment within the temple.

The pilfering of such a sacred artifact of Bishamon was thus even more egregious than moving the Tooth of the Shinsei and the Jade Shinsei, which at least are not actual artifacts of Bishamon specifically.





Now that we've discussed items and relics of great power, as well as ghost stories, let's continue the theme of ambiguity by talking about various supernatural NPC backstories.

Here's an in-universe story, which is an except from the unpublished autobiography of Mirumoto no Ryusei Yasunobu:

**He will offer no answers, only questions.  Hesitate before answering, and ask no questions yourself.  Pay heed to the danger in any question whose answer seems obvious.**

“A few years before my gempukku, I visited Kyuden Mirumoto.  While my uncle attended his duties, I was free to wander the city, content to lose myself exploring its streets and alleys.  As the colors and smells around me began to shift, I perceived them only as different from my home, not recognizing their unusual and alien nature.

“Feeling eyes on my back, I turned to face an oddly familiar man.  Even at a distance, the intensity of his gaze unnerved me.  After a few moments he broke into a sprint towards me, paying no heed to the strange folk around us.

“I fled into a nearby alley, not slowing until I’d twisted through enough side streets and buildings that I was confident I’d lost my strange pursuer.  I said nothing to my uncle that evening, driven by a childish worry that my freedom of movement on this visit might be restricted.

“Ten years later I returned to Kyuden Mirumoto.  Even having taken over my uncle’s responsibilities, I still found time to return to my youthful wandering.  This time I noticed as the clothes became more foreign and the smells more otherworldly.  As I stopped to ponder this, my eyes fell on a young boy walking ahead of me.  He turned, and at once I realized that I was looking upon myself as a child.  I knew he was about to flee, so I ran towards him with all my speed, trying to remember the routes I took all those years ago, but I soon lost sight of the boy.

“I retraced my steps looking for those same streets, but after weeks of walking every inch of the city from every direction I have found only the mundane and ordinary.”

I paused to gather my thoughts.  The monk asked no questions, so I continued.

“I have asked abbots and shugenja and fortune tellers about what meaning this might have, and what I should be doing about it.  When I heard of the prophet Baiten who could interpret dreams and omens, I hoped he would offer true wisdom rather than guesses and conjecture.  But I had just been appointed a county magistrate, and I worried that I would be seen to be neglecting my duties if I took such a long journey too soon into my tenure.

“When I heard about the murder of the prophet, I asked after others in the Empire with the wisdom to guide me.  Grand Abbot Okawa was widely believed to be such a man, so I resolved to make a pilgrimage to Ryoko Owari to seek his counsel.  But I again hesitated and delayed my journey to focus on my career.  When I learned that Okawa was killed on the Day of Thunder, I despaired at the thought that there might be no one now living able to guide me.”

Again I paused, waiting for a question.  After long moments of silence I continued.

“I am convinced that my experience was a sign to set me on the path to accomplish something.  I now see that I was so focused on worldly matters that I may have put my life’s true purpose in jeopardy.  I never would have chosen to sell away my destiny for temporal power, but I fear that is what I may have done.”

“You are correct”, Hoshi finally spoke.  “You will never unravel the meaning behind these events.  Whatever destiny was offered to you has been lost forever.  Nothing you do will ever change that.”

My stomach clenched, and in my shock and despair I struggled not to scream or vomit.  He will offer no answers, only questions.  I fought against anger and disbelief that in this of all situations the monk would offer plain and uncryptic truth.

“What will you do now?”

I stared at him in bewilderment as I worked to slow my breathing and calm my pounding heart.  I opened my mouth to demand to know what care he had for my future.  Hesitate before answering, and ask no questions yourself.  I closed my mouth.

Would I continue seeking the answer to my question, hoping that dedication in the face of futility might restore my favor with the kami?  No, there is no wisdom in self-deception and seeking out failure.

Would I take my best guess and forge ahead, attempting to fulfill a destiny I understood nothing about?  Pure folly.

What could I do but return home to the life I’d chosen, just as I’d have done after serving my purpose…

The world shifted around me as I glimpsed the future I might have had, returning to an ordinary life, content at having justified my existence.  I would have sought a high position, perhaps becoming a minister or even chancellor, and certainly a role model for my family.  But I would have still been shackled by the same mundane concerns that caused me to shirk my responsibilities to fate itself.

Hoshi’s patient gaze demanded no immediate answer to his question, so I re-folded my legs into the half lotus and dropped back into meditation.  In the minutes or hours that followed, I had my first vision, which no words can describe, for the vastness of the way of the interconnectedness of all things is beyond human expression.  I can say only that I perceived my futures, stretched out before me, each one tied to the choices that could make it real.  Although my visions were not yet as clear as they would later become, I saw clearly the shape of my new life.

“My atonement shall be to achieve even more than the destiny I have rejected.  Career, prestige, lineage, these have been my chains, holding me from acting outside of my appointed responsibilities.  All the problems of the world belong to me now, and I will spend my life and death to solve each one as I encounter it, no matter the cost.”

For the first time, Hoshi smiled.

“Would you like help?”

[Note from Yuki: because of the pages missing from sensei’s autobiography, I’m not sure if there’s more to this chapter.  I’ll investigate further before this is published.]

With that journal entry complete, here are some backstories of NPCs who are legionnaires in the 3rd Imperial Legion, which is stationed on the Kaiu Wall which protects the Empire from the Shadowlands.  Some of these backstories rely on the understanding that the human body can expel and heal itself from small amounts of Shadowlands taint, but that with enough of it the taint settles into your body permanently, making you forever tainted.  Also note that all of these 3rd Imperial Legion backstories are being told by an unreliable narrator, an unnamed courtier who is relaying these stories to an unknown third party:

The legion's general is Matsu Tsutomu.  When assigned to the Wall during his first tour in the Imperial Legions, Tsutomu was almost killed while on a raiding party.  He and his comrades had been assigned to clear out a horde of goblins about 80 miles from the Wall.  What the Hiruma scouts had failed to realize was that a family of ogres had taken control of the horde and merged it with other nearby hordes.  The battle was intense, with heavy losses on both sides, and most of the raiding party was killed.

As his strength began to fail, Tsutomu felt himself possessed by one of his ancestors, who fought for him and through him.  He charged at the only surviving ogre and finished it off with an inhuman display of strength and skill.  The few remaining goblins fled, leaving only five men left alive in the platoon.

Before his ancestor departed, Tsutomu was told that this was the first of three battles he would fight against overwhelming odds against forces from the Shadowlands.  Only through great courage and strength and cunning would he survive the next two encounters.  His ancestor left without even revealing her name, though Tsutomu later learned through research and augury that it was Matsu Mori, who died gloriously fighting against the Maw.

Tsutomu eventually reenlisted in the Imperial Legions and volunteered to be sent back to the Wall, eager to fulfill his destiny no matter the risk to himself.  He trained obsessively to make himself stronger and studied all the Shadowlands lore available to him.  His skill and expertise led him to quickly rise through the ranks of the Legion, and by the time he reenlisted for a third tour he was already a Company captain.

Nine years after his first great battle, Tsutomu was leading another raiding party, which came across a small nest of goblins.  The goblins fled immediately upon seeing the superior force, but they ran away from the water of the closest swamp and instead headed into the trees of the nearby forest.  Tsutomu was suspicious and sent his best scouts ahead of the platoon to determine whether this was a trap; goblins are occasionally capable of such trickery, and ogres who dominate local goblin hordes can be extremely cunning.

Sure enough, his scouts returned with reports of a far larger force than the platoon could comfortably defeat, waiting to surround them once they entered the trees.  Tsutomu worried that if he turned back to get reinforcements, they would be followed and might not be able to win the battle, even on open ground.  So instead he had his men retreat to the closest hill and hastily construct what fortifications they could.  His scouts crept to the edge of the forest and shot the closest goblins they could find, making much noise before running speedily back to the fortified platoon.  The goblins’ nature compelled them to give chase, and soon the entire horde was rushing to the top of the hill to confront the platoon.

Even with their successful plan, it was a grueling fight, and nearly a third of the platoon was killed before the goblins’ resolve broke and they fled.  Tsutomu was once again hailed as a hero, and eventually promoted to Battalion commander.  He further gained more respect from the Crab by quelling discontent against the Hiruma scouts who had once again failed to gather accurate information on the size of the goblin hordes less than 100 miles from the Wall.

A few months later while visiting his home in Matsu lands, Tsutomu awoke in the middle of the night in a cold sweat, terrified that his homeland would be attacked by Shadowlands forces.  He could not remember his dream, but the thought was crystal clear in his head that his presence was putting his homeland in danger.  Shaking uncontrollably from the weight of divine revelation, Tsutomu realized that because he was destined to once again face overwhelming Shadowlands forces, the further he went from the Wall, the larger a Shadowlands force would be required to smash through the Empire’s defenses to reach him.

Panicked, he departed immediately, and despite the protests from his family he declared that he would not return home until his destiny had been fulfilled.  Many have privately mocked him for holding such a narcissistic belief that he might destroy the Empire simply by traveling north.  Others have respectfully attempted to educate him on the traditional doctrines on prophecy, explaining that such fears are unfounded.  Tsutomu is unwavering, and contends that even if the chance of catastrophe is small, any risk of such absolute destruction is unacceptable.  Even most who deride his concerns are moved by his sense of duty and self-sacrifice.

It has now been almost two decades since his last great battle.  Now that he is well into his 40s, many wonder how long he can remain in command before being forced into retirement.  Tsutomu is convinced that the Day of Thunder heralds dangerous times ahead, and believes it will not be long before his destiny is fulfilled.

Let us now consider the ambiguities and interpretations of this story.

Matsu Tsutomu's experiences hold considerable ambiguity. At the core, there are two main incidents that appear supernatural: his alleged possession by an ancestor, Matsu Mori, during a battle, and his premonitory intuition or dream hinting at a disaster striking his homeland.

From a mundane perspective, it's plausible that Tsutomu, under the extreme stress of battle, might have experienced what is commonly termed a "hysterical strength" phenomenon. This could explain the "inhuman display of strength and skill" he manifested to defeat the ogre. His conviction of possession by Matsu Mori might have been a psychological reaction, perhaps a dissociative state, in response to an intense, life-threatening situation.

His premonitory intuition or dream could be attributed to an anxious mind grappling with the pressure and responsibility of his position. Constant exposure to the threat of the Shadowlands could have fed his subconscious fears, manifesting as a nightmare or waking premonition of disaster.

From a supernatural perspective, within Rokugan's cosmology, his experiences take on a different hue. Rokugani tradition is steeped in ancestral reverence, and the belief in ancestral spirits guiding or intervening in the lives of the living is commonplace. Tsutomu being possessed by his ancestor, Matsu Mori, during a critical battle aligns with this worldview. Similarly, his premonitory dream could be seen as a gift of foresight, a divine warning or omen from the Kami, reinforcing his connection to supernatural forces and destiny.

Current Influence:

Regardless of the nature of Tsutomu's experiences, they've indelibly shaped his worldview and guide his decisions as the general of the 1st Imperial legion.

His purported possession by Matsu Mori fostered in him a deep-seated belief in destiny and a sense of divine mandate, which continues to drive him. This conviction, regardless of its basis in reality, has made him fearless in the face of danger, led him to volunteer for additional tours on the Wall, and motivates him to train obsessively and study Shadowlands lore. This also means he perceives his role not just as a duty, but as a personal calling to serve and protect the Empire.

His premonitory intuition of a disaster striking his homeland has drastically impacted his personal life and further fueled his commitment to his duty. His self-imposed exile from his family and homeland illustrates the depths of his commitment to safeguarding the Empire. It also shows his willingness to make personal sacrifices for the greater good, which has undoubtedly earned him the respect and loyalty of his soldiers.

Furthermore, Tsutomu's belief in the validity of his premonitory dream means that he is constantly on the alert for potential threats to the Empire. His sense of urgency and expectation of an imminent, major conflict likely influences his strategic decisions, making him a vigilant and proactive leader.

In essence, Tsutomu's experiences, whether mundane or supernatural, have cultivated a profound sense of duty, self-sacrifice, and resolve in him, shaping him into a committed, driven, and vigilant leader of the 1st Imperial legion.

With all of that in mind, Tsutomu is not the only member of the 3rd legion who attunes their attention to the tides of fate:

Mirumoto Uta is a samurai merchant who works as a supply sergeant for her battalion in the 3rd Imperial legion.  She is acquiring a reputation as a degenerate gambler, and many believe that if she were not wealthy enough to sustain the frequent losses that all gamblers face, it would put her position and career in jeopardy.  She has explained that she doesn’t gamble for the money or the thrill, but as a form of fortune telling.  It is well known that luck ebbs and flows like the tide, with peaks and troughs like waves on the beach.  By gambling regularly to measure whether her good fortune is waxing or waning, she can choose opportune times to volunteer for missions in the Shadowlands.  Uta attributes her success in goblin battles to this practice.

Of course, many in the legion prefer more traditional prayers and offerings.  Consider the case of Matsu Kiyora:

The second time Kiyora went into the Shadowlands, her raiding party successfully slaughtered a small horde of goblins.  No one was killed, though Kiyora sustained heavy injuries.  She could feel her wounds festering as they journeyed back to the Wall, and by the time they rejoined civilization, Kiyora knew that she had become irrevocably tainted.  The healers told her to wait and see, cautioning her that many rookies become wrongly convinced of their own doom after their first Shadowlands battle, but Kiyora knew the truth.

She awoke the next morning feverish and nauseous.  The clear blue sky seemed tinted and joyless, and the fresh air felt wrong in her lungs.  She fled to the nearby woods, but even walking through the pristine beauty of nature offered no trace of happiness.  Feeling increasingly weak and exhausted, she knelt and drew her wakizashi, contemplating an honorable death in seppuku as the only thing left for her.  Half-delirious, she despaired that even in death the taint would not leave her body, and she wondered what would become of her spirit after it departed its corrupted shell.

Hearing a noise, she looked up to see an unnaturally large wolf not 20 feet from where she knelt.  As it crept towards her, she could see that it was no ordinary animal, and she dropped her wakizashi and prostrated herself, offering her body to the spirit.  She understood at that moment that being consumed by this creature would purify her in death, and the wolf could lead her spirit into Jigoku in payment for her sacrifice.  As the wolf came nearer, she pressed her face to the earth in supplication.  The last thing she remembered was its breath on her neck before she blacked out.

Kiyora awoke some time later, alone and confused.  She remained weak, but felt somehow also rejuvenated.  Though still sick and queasy, her appetite had returned.  As a light breeze wafted through the trees, she felt the beauty of the forest and knew that she had been saved.  Though the taint was still within her, it had been decreased by the spirit wolf such that her body now could fight against it and drive out the rest.  She wept with praise and gratitude, and staggered back to base to tell the others of her miracle.

Though some have wondered whether Kiyora’s tale is merely the fever dream of a hysterical rookie, many soldiers have joined Kiyora in leaving gifts and offerings in the forest and praying to the wolf spirit, asking for the same aid if ever they too should fall to the taint of the Shadowlands.

Here's another legionnaire from the 3rd Imperial legion, Isawa Koichi.  As a bit of background, in my campaigns, the Day of Thunder was different from the canonical L5R storyline, and it involved a cult of Lord Moon trying to stage a coup and take over several of the great clans in order to destroy the authority of the Emperor (who is more aligned with Lady Sun).  Prior to this time, the worship of Lord Moon was much more tolerated, and even afterwards it has not been declared heretical, since the Empire does not wish to declare itself in opposition to the Lord of the Night Sky, lest it suffer the consequences of his displeasure.  However, there are many more restrictions placed on moon worship than there were before (Lord Moon is not a fortune, but rather a celestial entity, if that matters).  With that in mind, here is Koichi's story:

Koichi is a tracker who hunted bandits in the Isawa woodlands before being assigned to the Imperial Legions.  She once tracked a group of bandits into the woods after following the tracks they left from robbing a caravan, but she soon lost their trail.  Reasoning that few bandits actually live in the woods, she took a chance on them returning to their peasant homes that evening.  After darkness fell, she was vindicated as she saw lantern light in the distance through the trees.  Following behind, she tried to draw close enough to avoid losing track of them, but she ended up stumbling upon one of the bandits who had not bothered to light a lantern.

He shouted for his comrades and attacked even as she drew her katana.  Though she managed to dispatch him, she was now wounded and feared she could no longer run as quickly as she needed to escape her pursuers.  As her lungs burned and her wounds bled, she prayed to whatever kami were listening to deliver her from this danger.

Suddenly she found herself stumbling into a small clearing.  The full moon shone overhead far more brightly than she remembered, enveloping her in its radiance and conveying a profound sense of peace and safety.  As she stepped into the center of the clearing, she looked up at the stars and found she could not recognize any constellations.  As she sat down to bandage her wounds, she periodically looked skyward to thank Lord Moon for offering her shelter.  Each time the night sky seemed different, as if the stars themselves were moving either too slowly or too quickly for her to track.

The next morning Koichi returned home safely, and was eventually able to uncover the identities of the surviving bandits.  She recounted her tale and credited Lord Moon’s favor for the arrests, and she began carrying obsidian with her to observe and solicit her good fortune.  She searched the woods for the clearing where she’d accepted sanctuary, but she was unsure whether it was any of the clearings she found, or whether she had even been in this world while taking refuge that night.  She commissioned obsidian figurines to bury in all the clearings in that area, and she burnt incense and prayed her gratitude as she meditated in the forest.

After the Day of Thunder, Koichi found herself looked upon with suspicion.  Lord Moon’s favor had become a mark of ignominy, but she was unwilling to forswear her benefactor.  She declared her undying loyalty to the Empire and swore she would never turn against Lady Sun or support any cult of Lord Moon, but neither could she show herself ungrateful.  After all, while the Emperor had recently declared it heretical to pray to Lord Moon from within any temple consecrated to Lady Sun, he had not forbidden his subjects from praying to Lord Moon in general, lest the Empire suffer the consequences of his displeasure.

Still, Koichi found herself marginalized, and eventually volunteered for the Imperial Legions, as that was the only promotion she found herself able to get.  Unfortunately, her reputation has followed her to the Kaiu Wall, where she has encountered similar hostility and suspicion.  Kuni Yori recently visited to interrogate her, and afterwards assured everyone that her loyalty was not in doubt, though he did say what tests he performed.  Koichi has been ordered to not share any details of their meeting, and she seems haunted by the experience.

Koichi later befriended a well-educated monk named Kouji who was too young to have deep wisdom but who had also struggled against the supernatural and been touched by it.  Though neither was able to answer the most important questions that the other faced, their friendly and collaboration ended up helping both of them navigate both the spiritual challenges and political adversities they each faced.  Kouji helped her to craft a vow to Lord Moon, which she had previously been nervous about swearing, because of the dangers of people thinking it implied disloyalty to the Empire.

Koichi had three requirements for such a vow:

-> she will perform some form of appropriate nightly prayers, which she will perform in the absence of any external light source, illuminated only by moonlight

-> as she was protected in the nighttime, she will protect any who seek her protection, and she will come to aid in any kind of warrior duties which take place at night from any who ask it of her, and she will continue to do this until they release her from those duties, regardless of what clan or family they are from

-> the vow needed to incorporate loyalty to the Empire, and make it clear that neither of the above requirements of the vow may override her loyalty to the Empire, and she may not be forced to ever perform any duty contrary to Imperial law

Kouji was thus able to suggest this wording for Koichi's vow:

"In the sight of all that is, under the timeless gaze of Lord Moon, I, Isawa Koichi, swear a solemn vow.

Each night, when Lord Moon ascends his throne in the celestial heavens, I shall pay homage with earnest prayers and silent reflection, carried out in the purity of his luminous glow. As he once bathed me in his protective light in the heart of the Isawa Woodlands, so too will I embrace his guidance in the quiet of the night, absent of all other light, a testament to our fateful meeting.

Just as I was sheltered by Lord Moon's radiance amidst danger, I too shall extend my protection to those in need. As a warrior and servant of the Empire, to any who seek refuge in the quiet of the night, regardless of clan or family, I will provide aid and stand as their shield, until they see fit to release me from such duties. The cry for assistance in the hush of the night shall not go unanswered, for in me they shall find a vigilant protector, an embodiment of Lord Moon's protective glow.

But let it be known, my devotion to Lord Moon is woven within the fabric of my unwavering loyalty to the Empire. This vow I swear, the promises I make, and the duties I undertake, shall never overshadow nor undermine my fidelity to the Emperor and the Imperial law. My actions shall reflect my honor, my strength, and my commitment to the Empire.

Lord Moon, hear my vow, a testament to our bond and a reflection of my gratitude. May your light guide me in upholding my word, as I navigate the path of honor, service, and loyalty. This I vow, under your watchful eye, and in the service of our glorious Empire."

Here's another story, this one also semi-tragic, about another member of the 3rd legion named Matsu Tonami:

Ever since the first time Tonami saw combat in the Shadowlands, she has been plagued with nightmares about being attacked by Shadowlands creatures.  In her dreams she sees her comrades die around her and feels herself being killed and devoured by monsters until she wakes up shaking or screaming.  She believes she was marked by an oni while in the Shadowlands, which attacks her in the dream realm while she sleeps.  Such things have been known to happen, but it’s extremely rare and such dreams usually stem from a lack of courage.  Many soldiers are granted transfers away from the Wall if they cannot handle the stress and danger.

Tonami knows that such a transfer would mark her forever as a coward, so she resists any suggestion to transfer away.  Instead, she has volunteered for more raids than are required, and has consistently demonstrated unflinching courage in the face of danger.  Some have whispered that she is simply making a show of bravery while being secretly terrified, though others argue that true courage is about overcoming fear rather than feeling unafraid.

Tonami eventually volunteered for a second tour on the Wall, attempting to put to rest any suspicion that her dreams come from cowardice or that she shrinks from danger.  She has taken to camping in the nearby woods where Kiyora was blessed by the wolf spirit, praying for it to also assist in her own struggles against the forces of darkness.  Even if the wolf spirit never answers her prayers, at least she will not disturb her comrades when she wakes up screaming, which has been happening with increasing frequency as she goes on more Shadowlands missions.

Tonami recently solicited aid from the shugenja Kuni Yori, but he refused, saying there was nothing he could do to help her.  He further declined to offer any guidance or even his opinion on the nature of her affliction.  Tonami has wondered aloud about the motives behind this odd refusal.  Such incuriousness is uncharacteristic of the Kuni, and this has made her further convinced that her predicament is strange and supernatural in nature.

(Consider how this story is also ambiguous - a modern reader would be likely to interpret Tonami's affliction as psychological in nature rather than supernatural.  However, in addition to the themes of ambiguity, Tonami's circumstances continue to drive her behavior now.)

A much less sad and unpleasant story is the leadership of lieutenant Shiba Asayo:

Asayo is a courtier who met the customary skepticism that most bushi feel for any courtier assigned to the Wall.  Many feel nervous about going into battle alongside a man who isn’t a warrior, far preferring bushi comrades who are maximally trained in combat.  They were further suspicious of his seemingly foppish nature, as his main interests are playwriting and painting.  However, he has proven himself in battle and in the dojo enough times that no one who has fought against or alongside him has any concern about his worthiness.

Before each mission into the Shadowlands, Asayo paints one half of a painting, then finishes it after his return.  The first half is itself a complete (if spare) work, and the second half fills in details which often change the overall meaning of the piece.  He expects that if he falls in battle against the forces of evil then his final “unfinished” painting shall be quite a collector’s item.  He has gifted some of his finest works to high-ranking officers and visiting officials, and his art has become well regarded, especially since each painting has an associated (though often exaggerated) story from his mission.

As he progresses in mastery of his art, Asayo increasingly finds himself in a sublime and almost trancelike state as he paints, as the process of the great masters has been described.  Just as a swordsman is told to strike with no thought, so too has Asayo begun to create with a clear mind and let the brush move of its own accord.  Eventually he began noticing details in his half-finished works that he does not remember adding, which he recognizes as a sign that he is on the path to becoming one of the transcendent masters.

About a year ago, when returning to finish a painting after a mission, he started noticing details which reminded him of places or objects he encountered while in the Shadowlands.  It’s always subtle, such as an oddly shaped branch or the curve of a rocky stream, but it has now happened enough times that he has begun sharing his unfinished works.  Reactions are mixed, but many have recognized details in his unfinished paintings later appearing in the Shadowlands.  Some of Asayo’s comrades have taken to scrutinizing his half-finished works before they embark on a mission with him, looking for signs and omens.

Here's one more story about a legionnaire from the 3rd Imperial legion:

After being assigned to the Imperial Legions, Kitsuki Fu was first stationed with the 2nd Imperial legion at Beiden Pass.  The legion there is expected to maintain a sizable force in the mountain pass itself, but the soldiers far prefer to spend their time in the nearby city of Ryoko Owari.  People often make arrangements to cover for one another so they can spend extra time in the city, but sometimes due to poor planning or plain irresponsibility people simply fail to report for duty.  Fu was assigned to a squad tasked with recording these absences, tracking down wayward soldiers, and returning them to Beiden Pass for discipline.

One day as Fu set about her usual routine, she found herself with the odd feeling that she was neglecting something important.  She set aside those concerns to focus on the day’s work, but that night she reviewed her journal to check for notes or reminders.  She was shocked to learn that she had been investigating a disappearance of which she had no memory.  Fu asked her colleagues, but none of them could remember anything about it.  She took more notes and wrote down her reactions, then wrapped her journal around her daisho in case she awoke the next morning with another hole in her memory.

Fu woke without forgetting her evening’s work, but found that the pages she had been studying were missing.  Her entry from the previous night was still present, but all other pages from the past week were gone.  Panicked, she began pouring over the legion’s attendance records to see who might be missing, and insisting that her colleagues begin constantly journaling their own activities and reviewing those journals daily.

The next night, Fu found herself in the room of her company captain.  As she came back to herself, she found herself being shaken awake even as she realized she was burning the journal she had convinced him to begin keeping.  It was later discovered that she had also destroyed the attendance records as well as all records of the soldiers currently assigned to the legion.

Fu was terrified, and insisted that some sinister force was at work and anyone could now be in danger, perhaps of being eaten by an oni which consumed even the memories of its victims.  The prospect was frightening (if unlikely), so much work was done to determine whether anyone was missing, and new procedures put in place to detect any such disappearances in the future.  Fu insisted that the measures were laughingly insufficient and became belligerent at any suggestion that she was overreacting.  It was pointed out that the only sign of anything awry was her own behavior, and perhaps she had become possessed by some spirit.

A shugenja was called in, who confirmed she was not currently possessed, though this did not prove she had not been possessed at some time in the past or that she would not again fall victim to possession in the future.  As she became increasingly confrontational and hysterical, she was eventually demoted and transferred to the Wall, where the officers had far more experience keeping an eye on soldiers who might be suffering evil influences.

Fu eventually realized that the only way to see the investigation through was to prove her sanity and level-headedness to her superiors in her current post.  She has stated that she wishes to demonstrate her clear thinking and sharp intellect so that her superiors can write letters of recommendation and send word that this matter should be given more urgency that it has previously received.  Because she had been near the end of her tour of duty, she reenlisted to give herself more time to gain the recommendations she requires.

After the Day of Thunder, Fu felt vindicated and she suspects that Lord Moon’s servants may have had some hand in this matter.  She has gotten word that this investigation has received increased scrutiny after it was revealed that some in the Scorpion clan had fallen under Lord Moon’s influence, but she remains convinced they are not doing enough.  Fu intends to return to Ryoko Owari after this tour of duty to hunt for whatever monster lurks in the shadows there.

In the meantime, Fu keeps a meticulous journal and has developed an obsessive system of indexing its pages, then carving the index into wooden planks she nails to the walls of the barracks.  She reviews the journals regularly and checks for missing pages to ensure that no more of her memories are stolen from her.  Thus far she has had no further missing time, which only confirms that the danger is centered around Ryoko Owari and Beiden Pass.

Note that Fu's backstory was explained by the story of the Nameless One, though Fu did not have this explanation at the time of the 3rd Imperial Legion campaign.





Here are some more backstories, this time from the "Hidden Way" campaign, which took place next to the 1st Imperial Legion encampment.

The 1st Imperial Legion is tasked with guarding the Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands.  The Emperor’s second son traditionally commands this legion starting at his gempukku, giving him valuable leadership experience while keeping him away from the temptation of entangling alliances with those who might seek to subvert authority of the crown prince.  Located on the western frontier of the Empire, this post ends up being mostly ceremonial since it has been centuries since the last gaijin invasion.

One thing I liked to do in this campaign was come up with a lot of stories about people being haunted by ghosts.  We've already discussed this, but here are more examples:

Here's more information about Matsu no Moyu Kazushi's own experiences with ghosts and hauntings, which he denies strenuously:

A former member of Matsu Gohei’s command staff, Kazushi voluntarily took a minor demotion after his association with Gohei became seen so widely as questionable. He decided to serve in the 1st Imperial legion rather than to join the Office of the Crystal Champion, in part because it is not yet clear what that will ultimately entail.

Gohei was branded “the butcher” by his enemies, and decided to take this on as a mark of pride. This was for a number of things, including:

→ Catching scouts and then executing them as peasants even when they claimed to be samurai.

→ Giving samurai executions (i.e. beheadings) to “samurai caught posing as peasants” who may or may not have just been peasants.

→ Running off priests and monks who descended on battlefields after battles had ended to perform death rites to prevent the recently deceased from haunting the battlefields as unhappy ghosts. Occasionally a priest or monk would refuse to leave and Gohei would execute them as Crane spies.

This last example was particularly egregious, but Gohei prides himself on fearing nothing, and especially being unafraid of ghosts, even the vengeful ancestors of his enemies. In particular, he would raid and pillage ancestral shrines in conquored territory, even while others treated them with the same reverence as shrines and temples to the fortunes and kami.

Kazushi participated in many of these raids and executions, and yet was the first person to warn everyone off of attacking Doji no Tsume Toyohiro, saying things like, “Trust me, it’s a bad idea and not worth it to interfere with a man’s ancestors.” Last year during the entire week of the Bon festival, Kazushi enshrined himself in Chai Sedo burning incense and praying to his own ancestors. Evidently he consulted with Toranosuke (the abbot of Chai Sedo) and was told this was a good way to fulfill his own ancestral commitments while remaining safe from vengeful ghosts during the week in which the gates of Jigoku are open.

It’s unclear how Bayushi Iru discovered all of this, since the Lion tend to close ranks and not share internal gossip, and Toranosuke is known for discretion, but Iru is the reason why this is all public knowledge. After a minor public squabble, she called him out as being haunted, using language like “what did that idiot think would happen – he desecrated ancestral shrines so now of course he’s haunted by angry ancestors!” Kazushi challenged her to a duel and was forced to submit by her superior skill. (Iru said nothing disparaging afterwards, but as a person who always complements her opponents after any kind of duel her silence spoke volumes.)

Here's another member of the 1st legion with an interesting vow-related experience:

Yasuki Kiyomi’s mother is the Yasuki Deputy Minister of Works. Kiyomi should have followed in his parents’ footsteps, but shortly before his gempukku his mother had a dream in which a divine being told her that her son should become an Imperial legionnaire and take a vow of poverty. The exact divine being is unclear: there were several details in the dream which suggested ether Bishamon (the fortune of Strength), Hachiman (the fortune of Battle), or Chagatai (the fortune of courage).

Kiyomi was therefore assigned to the 1st Imperial legion and was made a platoon lieutenant at 14 (because of his mother’s rank). He hoped that his first tour would be sufficient, but his astrology reading leading up to the end of his tour indicated that he should continue current endeavors and avoid new undertakings or journeys. He is therefore in his 2nd tour and hoping to be able to return home – it’s certainly possible that becoming a legionnaire was intended to be a single step on the journey towards his destiny. Or perhaps he will end up needing to remain a legionnaire for his whole life… or at least until his destiny has been clearly fulfilled.

The reason for the vow of poverty is unclear, and Kiyomi has publicly wondered about whether the vow is legitmate, since it was sworn “to the divine being who appeared to my mother in her dream” rather than naming a fortune or kami by name.





Another type of ambiguity which exists in this setting is that even when something is plainly supernatural, people will debate it's origin and significance.  For example, here's an open letter written by the head of the Agasha shugenja academy, Agasha Tamori, about why he is banning Kitsu Okura's book "On the relationship between Man and the Fortunes" from all Agasha libraries and recommending that it be banned from other Dragon libraries as well:

The line of Kitsu Okura is unique in all of recorded history.  Only one man in ten thousand is gifted by the kami as a shugenja, and even among the children of shugenja, only one in a century will share the talents of their sire.  Yet in every generation for three centuries, the firstborn son of Kitsu Okura unfailingly becomes a shugenja, each choosing the name of Kitsu Okura at his gempukku.

Okura’s progeny claim ignorance of the source and nature of their blessing.  Remarkably, though each has been a competent practitioner, none have shown any abilities above or below the ordinary.  Without exception, their powers have been plainly average.

Even still, the significance of this anomaly is impossible to understate.  If we could understand and replicate whatever pleased the fortunes so greatly about this family, it would usher in a new era of power and prosperity.  In seeking to uncover this mystery, we must ask ourselves what sets this lineage apart.

Three things are extraordinary about the line of Kitsu Okura.  First, their great scholarship; their progenitor was one of the greatest scholars the Empire has ever known, and every descendant has followed in those footsteps.  Second, their unceasing chain of shugenja fathers and sons.  Lastly their conspicuous lack of any notably powerful shugenja in more than three hundred years.

It would be absurdly coincidental for three different exceptional traits to persist for a dozen generations through unrelated happenstance.  Let us therefore assume these peculiarities are interwoven.  We must then ask ourselves what contrivance would produce these three particular outcomes.

One of the linkages is well explored - it has long been noted that power and scholarship are seldom shared by the same shugenja.  List the twenty most accomplished chroniclers of lore and the twenty most powerful shugenja the Empire has ever known, and not one name appears twice.  The ability to explain plainly a complex truth comes with expertise in any natural discipline, but this is apparently not so with the supernatural.

Indeed, the Shinsei rarely answered any question but with another question.  Such teaching enlightens more than outright explanation possibly could.  Any statement about the Tao is wrong, for the Tao is more complex in every facet than words can describe, and those seeking enlightenment must therefore pursue an understanding beyond language.

It follows that using language to describe the indescribable is an impediment to our mastery of the elements.  It therefore seems prudent to give little weight to writings such as those of Kitsu Okura, lest they encourage counterproductive patterns of thought.  One wonders how much potential has been squandered by young shugenja seeking to learn more of their gifts, being ensnared by wise-seeming words, and unknowingly curbing their own talents as they travel false paths.  Even powerful shugenja who cast aside these distractions might have found even greater power had they not wasted past thoughts and energies on the diversions of false scholars.

If a shugenja reads a book and then fails to achieve their full potential as a direct result, is their lost power simply unattained, or could we say it was stolen by the book’s author?  Perhaps literally so, if my suspicions are correct.

Are we to believe that after three hundred years, the line of Kitsu Okura has not realized that their attempts at scholarship have held them back?  That every powerful shugenja in history only came into their power after they stopped trying to put the nature of their abilities into words?  Why would the line of Kitsu Okura unceasingly refine and develop their scholastic theories for three centuries, when no great shugenja in that time has ever credited them as aiding the development of his own wisdom and power?

At best, the scholastic works of Kitsu Okura are a well intentioned distraction, best avoided by any shugenja with care for his own achievement.  At worst, they are a trap set to drain us of some portion of our power, so that the line of Kitsu Okura may continue.  In either case, I have ordered his texts banned from all Agasha libraries, and recommend that all other great Families do the same.

The above letter emphasizes several themes that I try to capture in many aspects of Rokugan's cosmology, especially the well-accepted tension between wisdom and scholarship.  Truth and understanding, especially of the Fortunes or more generally of the Tao, are too big and complex to put into words, so any attempts to do so fall flat.  Those who spend their lives trying to come up with the right words to use to describe the indescribable impair their own ability to reach true understanding.  Thus, the greatest scholars are often students of the wisest, rather than being the wisest themselves.

Consider the following dialog between Tamori and Isawa Tsuke, the Elemental Master of Fire, in which they disagreed about the implications of Kitsu Okura and his lineage:

"Tsuke-sama," Tamori begins, his eyes stern and serious, "You've heard of Kitsu Okura's works, haven't you?"

Tsuke waves a hand dismissively. "Of course. His 'observations' about man and the fortunes? Idle musings, at best. Barely worth mentioning, certainly not worth banning."

Tamori tightens his grip on the scroll in his hands, a copy of Okura's contentious work. "But isn't that precisely the danger? His musings, as you call them, might seem harmless. But they mislead, they distract."

"Distract from what?" Tsuke retorts, chuckling lightly. "Is your faith so frail, Tamori? Does your understanding of the Tao tremble at the thought of differing perspectives?"

Tamori remains undeterred, shaking his head. "It's not about faith, Tsuke-sama. It's about power, understanding, and mastery over the elements. Okura's words, well-crafted though they are, form a barrier to true understanding. They describe the indescribable, thereby weakening our connection to the kami."

Tsuke raises a skeptical eyebrow. "You believe words on a page can drain our power, Tamori? That's a rather superstitious notion, isn't it? Even for a shugenja."

"Consider Okura's lineage," Tamori counters. "Every firstborn son a shugenja, yet none exceptional in their power, despite their scholarly prowess. They attempt to describe the Tao in words, and their potential is lost. Is that not suspicious?"

Tsuke's laughter is robust, echoing in the chamber. "You think this... this academic malady is some form of... of spiritual vampirism?" He leans forward, smirking. "Tamori, you do have a flair for the dramatic."

"It's not dramatics, Tsuke-sama, it's prudence," Tamori insists, his voice steady. "We must guard against influences that can sway us from the true path of understanding."

Tsuke dismisses this with a wave, leaning back in his seat. "And what is the true path, Tamori? You argue against the written word, yet here we are, surrounded by our great libraries. Should we burn those as well? Our path is diverse, as diverse as the elements we wield."

Tamori bows his head slightly, acknowledging the point. "True, Tsuke-sama. Yet even the greatest river is guided by its banks. Let us not blur those boundaries with such questionable texts."

Tsuke shrugs, seemingly indifferent. "Perhaps. But I, for one, am not afraid of a few 'questionable texts'. If you want to ban them in your libraries, be my guest, Tamori. But do not expect the rest of us to follow your lead."

As Tsuke dismisses him, Tamori merely nods, a determined glint in his eyes.

Note that from a narrative perspective, Agasha Tamori's theory is really cool and interesting, and as a writer/gamemaster it's tempting to say that cool theories are always correct.  But I think it's more rewarding to maintain a lot of the mystery and ambiguity, and in order to do that, it means that a large percentage of cool theories like this need to be true and another large percentage need to be false.  One of the best ways to do that is for the ambiguity to exist in-universe so that characters themselves will have well-founded arguments about them.





Now let's turn back to our earlier discussion of soothsaying.  We've discussed a lot of different types of soothsaying, and mostly we've focused on different types of augurs and prophets.  However, another means of soothsaying is to create an artifact of great power, which is attuned to some aspect of reality such that it can behave in ways which predict the future.

The most dramatic example of this is the Burning Words, which was supposedly locked up in the early days of the Empire.  The Burning Words are supposedly a physical manifestation in the mortal realm of the marriage contract between Lord Moon and Lady Sun, containing Lady Sun's warmth and wisdom as well as Lord Moon's coldness and cunning.  One who looks upon the Burning Words will have a great truth revealed to them - often but not always a prediction about the future, though sometimes a revelation about the past which completely changes the viewer's conception of their own life and place in the world.

There are two significant properties of the Burning Words which make them the most infamous and supposedly the most powerful source of prophetic revelation in the world:

1) Predictions made by the Burning Words always come true.  Many prophecies are "unstable", in that they do not take themselves into account.  A prophet might predict what would have occurred had her warning not been given, but the fact that a prophecy has been discharged gives humans the opportunity to change which of many possible futures will actually come to pass.  Predictions made by the Burning words will always come true - one who witnesses such a prediction knows that even if they reveal this truth are believed, this knowledge will not be enough to prevent the prophecy from being fulfilled.

2) The Burning Words reveal only terrible truths.  It is said that most who gaze upon them wish that they would have been spared the burden of such terrible knowledge.  The Burning Words transmit not only the truth itself, but the terrible sense that there are no technicalities or loopholes, and that any outcome which fulfils them will indeed be terrible in some regard.

A famous historical example is that of Yasuki Noriko.  When the warlord Sato swore fealty to Yasuki, first of her name, and became the first daimyo of the Sato house of the new Yasuki family of the Crane clan (remember that the Yasuki were Crane for several hundred years before changing their allegiance to the Crab clan), Yasuki's niece Noriko married Sato's son Takumi.  Noriko was the most experienced caravan master in the world, having been all across the Empire many times, and as such she was entrusted with safeguarding the Burning Words, bolstered by Seppun family Imperial guards.

This probably requires some explanation as well.  Artifacts of great power are said to reach out and call people to them - they may not be alive or have an intellect, but they certainly possess great will, and the longer that they stay in one place, the more likely it is that circumstances will conspire to bring someone in contact with the artifact.  A workaround which has sometimes proved effective is to never let such an item of great power reman in one place for long - holy relics whose power is feared might sometimes be moved to different temples across the Empire, for example.

The Hantei are said to have had issues with the Burning Words calling people to them, and therefore they decided to keep them moving, even changing out many of the caravan guards from time to time, to ensure that the Burning Words could work no mischief.

However, due to a freak accident, which was immediately recognized as the Burning Words reaching out into the world to twist fate to cause this outcome, the wheel of the wagon where they were kept broke, and the wagon collapsed, and for a few moments Noriko beheld them.  She beheld the following prophecy.

"Hantei Genji will order the execution of the Sato lineage."

She understood in that moment that her father in law must have already committed treason.  She understood that throwing herself on the mercy of Hantei Genji would do nothing to prevent this outcome.  She understood that this order might not happen immediately, and that she could act to delay or accelerate it.  And most terribly of all, she understood that the only way to save many of those she loved would be to work to render the orders of the Hantei Emperor impotent - while she could not prevent this order from being given, there was some hope that she could prevent it from being carried out.  However, to accomplish this would destroy everything her birth family had fought to create - to make the orders of the Emperor meaningless would be to destroy the Empire itself.  There was some chance that she could save her new family, but it might cost the favor of the gods, and create a future in which Heaven itself turned its back on humanity.

Noriko ultimately accepted the terrible fate, while setting out to save what few members she could.  While many of those she had come to love would certainly die, including her own husband, she could arrange marriages into other lineages or families, saving most (but not all!) of her own children.

After making these arrangements, and confirming the treachery of her father-in-law, Noriko informed the Hantei of the Sato lineage's perfidity and she and her son accepted their own fates, asking only to commit seppuku to demonstrate their honor for history and cleanse the stain on the Yasuki family's honor.  Hanti Genji accepted, and "The Burning Words" is a famous play commemorating this sacrifice.

Note that while Noriko was helpless to prevent terrible events from unfolding, her situation was not hopeless, as she was able to ensure a better outcome than what otherwise might have occurred!

One final thing to note about the Burning Words is that the Hantei dynasty eventually found a safer place for them in the Forgotten Tomb.  Because the entrance to the Forgotten Tomb moves from place to place over time in patterns which are difficult to predict or anticipate, the Burning Words can stay in one place "forever", while being limited in their ability to cause such strife.  It is said that no Hantei Emperor has looked upon the Burning Words or ordered any other to do so in many centuries, and the last Emperor to do so was Hantei the 16th (the Steel Chrysanthemum).

Note that the Burning Words are unlike almost any other artifact or holy relic in Rokugan.  Its powers are immediately understandable and well-defined, its effects unmistakeable, and there's absolutely no ambiguity in what they do or how they work.  (The only ambiguity is whether you actually believe in these stories, since their events are nearly a thousand years ago.)  Although I mainly like to have ambiguity be a theme in how supernatural items function, it's nice to have exceptions from time to time.

This will also be true for some items which PCs encounter - occasionally they will find a magic item whose powers are unmistakeable, though even in these cases there will tend to be some amount of ambiguity about what is implied by the ways that its powers manifest.

With all of this in mind, I'd like to talk about a less dramatic but still reproduceable artifact created by a smith.  The PCs in the "Hidden Way" campaign were riding back and making camp after an encounter with some caravan raiders on the Moto steppes, and they were approached by a farrier named Moto Khuyag, who offered to reshoe their horses for free.  He explained that Moto tribes had been having issues with ghosts appearing on the horizon, and their wise men had determined that an excellent way to combat that was to reshoe any horse whose rider had recently died OR taken a life.  This helped to disrupt the connections between warriors and the spirits of their slain enemies, which was better all around.  Lhuyag later appeared under similar circumstances shortly after the PCs fought a battle against some rebellious Moto who had defied their khan's authority.

The PCs eventually visited Shiro Moto (which the Moto call Karakoru), and sought out Moto Khuyag, partially out of suspicion about how he seemed to repeatedly turn up after battles.  The PCs found that Khuyag's master, Moto Khunbish, was the spiritual advisor to Moto Gaheris, the Moto daimyo.  Khuyag was actually a Rokugani by birth and said that he had been born to the southeast of Kyuden Otaku, before moving there, and then later moving on to Kyuden Shinjo, the capital of Unicorn lands.  He met Gaheris there years earlier while Gaheris was visiting, and was assigned as the farrier to the Moto guests, during which time he impressed Gaheris greatly with his wisdom and philosophical observations as a smith (Khunbish explained he had previously made knives before becoming a farrier, and that the Rokugani name he had chosen for himself prior to becoming Moto Khunbish was Seito).

Khunbish had devised an apparatus by which the molten iron from melted horseshoes would pass through a series of channels and drip-drains.  This apparatus had been calibrated to extract the essences of death from the horseshoes of riders who had encountered death.  It could be recalibrated based on whether it was extracting essences from the horseshoes of horses whose riders had recently killed, recently died, or recently chosen not to fight when presented with the opportunity.  This produced iron ingots in which the purified and distilled essences of death were strong, which allowed them to serve as potent raw materials for the construction of further artifacts.

Khuyag was already a master farrier when Moto Khunbish came to Moto lands 6 years ago. He re-apprenticed himself to Khunbish as an apprentice smith and eventually produced his masterpiece.  Note that in this context "masterpiece" is a term of art referring to the specific work which proves that an apprentice has become a master, if it passes the judgement of the master who has trained them.

Khuyag's masterpiece was a “death detector” which he explained could predict “large-scale violent death” within Moto lands.  Khunbish deemed this acceptable as a masterpiece, though Khuyag points out its many imperfections:

→ Because heaven has gifted humanity with the ability to make choices, the future is not set, and therefore his detector may fail to detect deaths or show false positives. Since it only detects violent death on a large scale, it is significantly more likely to have false positives than false negatives. Both the Tuesday and Thursday groups had Khuyag appear at a time he thought a battle had occurred in their vicinity, when in fact no battle had taken place – in both cases a battle was possible but was prevented through human choice. This is a fundamental limitation on all forms of soothsaying - even the infallibility of the Burning Words allows for human choice to affect the manner in which its prophecies are fulfilled!

→ The detection is tied to a geographic location, in which an accurate map is made and where at various landmarks “the blood of horses is spilled” and “bloodied earth is returned to Shiro Moto”. Thus, Khuyag cannot use his detection device in Uru lands where Moto Gaheris was at the time waging war, and Khuyag thus needs to create a separate detector for any other area in which he wishes to detect death.

→ The area of detection must be sparsely populated – Moto lands are notoriously poor in everything but grasslands and horses, and has perhaps only a tithe (10%) the population density of most other places in the Empire. If it were too dense the the “intersections of fates and choices would be too numerous” for Khuyag’s death detector to function.

→ Other forms of prophetic instruction and oracular divination may be hidden from this detection. Thus, even a large battle might not show up if e.g. divine intervention provoked a sudden battle.

→ All forms of soothsaying are divided into stable and unstable predictions (which is different from the distinction between certain and uncertain predictions). As explained earlier, stable predictions take themselves into account – they predict futures in which the result of the prediction is known and accounted for in the resulting choices made. Unstable predictions only tell you what would have happened if the prediction had never been made.

→ Khuyag describes his own death detectors as “in the worse of all situations”, which is that it sometimes takes itself into consideration and other times does not. Thus, if mass violent death is predicted at a certain location and you proceed to go to that location, you cannot be sure that the prediction didn’t lead to violent deaths which would not have otherwise occurred. Khuyag is uncertain what factors make his detector sometimes give stable predictions and other times not – there are so many variables which could cause this that it may be impossible to ever determine.

→ Khuyag hopes that his next device will be able to solve this. It may not be possible even in theory to build a device which can always take itself into account - the Burning Words are said to do this, but they may be a creation of heaven and not formed by the hands of man. But according to Khuyag, “Master Khunbish says it should be within my capabilities to create a new version which never takes its own predictions into account.”

This new death detector, configured for Uru lands, would allow Gaheris to do something like the following when he is unsure of where Uru military forces are located:

→ Divide his forces into X different detachments, and order each to travel to a particular place in Uru lands to secure that territory.

→ After the order is given, but prior to any detachment leaving, consult with the death detector.

→ If large-scale violent death doesn’t occur in any of those locations, Gaheris can consider those territories secured (temporarily), and can then consolidate his forces back into a single force and repeat this process.

→ If large-scale violent death is predicted at one or more of those locations, Gaheris can cancel his orders and instead direct all of his armies to where death will occur, which should all-but guarantee victory. (Akodo Natsuki was quick to point out, and argued quite convincingly to Khuyag, that this only guarantees death and that such “deadly ground” may lead to defeat. Khuyag responds that strategy and tactics are not his areas or expertise, but Gaheris is confident that his armies will prevail in direct confrontation and thus is mainly worried about an enemy which seeks to evade him.)

Despite his self-deprecating manner, Khuyag is apparently the most impressive of Moto Khunbish's apprentices, and in consultation with Master Khunbish has also devised an approach for finding water in the Burning Sands desert.  The desert has some amount of underground water sources, but it is extremely difficult to find a suitable location where a well can be dug.  Khuyag has proposed a solution which involves the ancient practice of “fate tying”.  Fate tying has fallen into disfavor, but Khuyag is quick to point out that it has never been declared heretical. The fate of a human who has already been justly sentenced to die is used to make a prediction about an unrelated matter, “tying their fate” to the new matter – in this case finding water in the desert.

This can only occur in remote locations with minimal human presence – even most of the notoriously-sparse Moto lands would be too densely populated. The “connections of destinies and choices” when close to too many other humans is known to prevent any “fate-tying” scheme from working.

To predict whether a person will die within a broad period of time, in the general case, may not be even theoretically possible. However, placing more restrictions upon the predictions increases their accuracy. In this case, we take someone who is extremely isolated (in the desert away from most other humans), and wish to predict whether they will die within a single day by the means of horses (being drawn and quartered) in a matter relating to water. Khuyag belives that he can build a device which can successfully make predictions under those circumstances.

This device will allow the Moto to find water in the desert in the following way:

→ Pick a spot and stand prepared to dig for water. Take a prisoner we will execute if we find groundwater in this spot within a day of digging. If the reading indicates that the prisoner would be executed within the day, we dig, find water, and execute the prisoner. If not then we move on to the next spot with a new prisoner.

→ We must perform 1 execution per well we dig. This is unavoidable under any fate-tying scheme, but is one reason why the Moto need so many Uru prisoners - the Moto have chosen to "decimate" those who have opposed them, and after an Uru army surrenders they take every tenth man to be executed for having opposed the Moto.

→ Khuyag points out that this will not work unless the detector he builds is "reliably unstable", i.e. it must NEVER take its own predictions into account. If it sometimes does (as with his death detection map of Moto lands), then someone might be shown as being executed because the prediction causes it to happen!

→ Note that under this scheme we cannot use the same prisoner on two different spots in the same day. This means that the limit of how many spots can be checked for suitability in the same day is limited to the number of prisoners slated to be executed, and is another reason why the Moto need so many Uru prisoners.

Khuyag also mentioned that there is theoretically a way around that last limitation of only being able to use a prisoner to check a single spot per day. “Master Khunbish has said that this should be within my ability, but I sometimes wonder if his regard for my skill is greater than my current capabilities.”  Here is how the scheme would function:

→ Khuyag will attempt to build two “death detectors”, one with a prediction length of 1 day as described above, and the second with an extremely short duration, such as 1 minute. The only length requirement is that we must have enough time to take 2 readings before the time is up.

→ As before, the 1-day reader must be calibrated to be "reliably unstable", i.e. never take itself into account and only show whether the person would be dead within a day while not taking things which result from its own prophetic readings into account.

→ The 1-minute reader must be calibrated to always take the other device into account but never itself. (If a device took itself into account, then it would always indicate execution and always be correct, since the act of predicting the execution would cause the execution.)

→ This allows us to pick a spot and stand prepared to dig for water. We have a prisoner we will execute if we find groundwater in this spot within a day of digging. We then prepare to take a reading with the 1-day reader, but while making that preparation we take a reading with the 1-minute reader. We only take the second reading if the first reading indicates the person will die within a minute. If the second reading confirms the first one, which it always should (unless outside forces are at play), then we execute the person and begin digging.

→ If for any reason the second reading fails we abort and stop taking readings for that person for the day, since something else interfered with this process and none of the 1-day readings can be trusted until tomorrow.

→ This allows us to reuse the same prisoner multiple times in the same day – they can be tested again and again by the 1-minute reader until such time as water is found. Only then are they executed and do we need to move onto the next prisoner.

Note that this entire scheme is intended (by me as the author) to be horrifying!  Even if the prisoners have been sentenced to be executed for their crimes, this is tantamount to human sacrifice, and modern readers/players are likely to find this entire scheme repulsive.  Indeed, while I intended for this entire scheme to help flesh out the ways in which smiths could create artifacts of power, I also wanted this entire setup to be a giant red flag which caused the PCs to question whether they wanted to continue supporting the NPCs they had allied with (or if they did, then whether they wanted to try to convince them to change their behavior).

When the PCs later consulted with Prince Fukuhachi, the Emperor's son and General of the 1st Imperial Legion, the Prince revealed that while the practice of "fate tying" had not been officially banned, no Emperor had done it since the days of Hantei the 16th.  Later Emperors found they could achieve the same effects by destroying inanimate objects of great significance, such as famous swords or holy relics.  However, this is offensive to the ancestors and gods, and so eventually the Order of Amaterasu realized one could craft sticks of incense so holy that their burning could be detected by the same underlying principles, and since the burning of such incense honored rather than insulted the gods, this is a safe alternative.  However, the creation of such incense is incredibly time consuming and few are qualified to do so - the Order of Amaterasu is able to create perhaps only a dozen sticks per year, which means they must be rationed to be used in only the most important of circumstances and to answer only the most pressing of questions.





Now let's turn to some more lighthearted setting details, that of gardens.  Here was the introduction to the Hidden Way campaign:

> The 1st Imperial Legion is tasked with guarding the Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands.  The Emperor’s second son traditionally commands this legion starting at his gempukku, giving him valuable leadership experience while keeping him away from the temptation of entangling alliances with those who might seek to subvert authority of the crown prince.  Located on the western frontier of the Empire, this post ends up being mostly ceremonial since it has been centuries since the last gaijin invasion.

> Trade with gaijin lands was banned by Imperial decree over 300 years ago.  However, the gaijin demand for silk and their willingness to buy it with silver makes smuggling incredibly profitable.  The Hidden Way is a criminal syndicate run by samurai ex-legionnaires who have become one of the largest suppliers of silver to the Imperial Mint.

> The player characters in this campaign are the people currently running The Hidden Way.  Over the last 300 years, there have been periods of time when The Hidden Way was ruthlessly cutthroat in the pursuit of their profits, and other times when they viewed themselves as primarily serving the Empire by providing the silver for its coinage while helping the Emperor prevent the more dangerous forms of gaijin trade.  It will be up to the PCs where they want to fall on this spectrum, both individually and collectively.

For centuries, the Hidden Way has maintained the 11 Imperial gardens of Chai Sedo as part of the honorable service “The Western Star” mining company provides to the prince. Most legionnaires assume that the Hidden Way started these gardens to entice the prince to look the other way on their smuggling, but the truth (known to any student of the legion’s history) is the opposite – the Hidden Way itself grew out of the alliance of samurai from different clans who were already tending to these gardens!

Each garden has a “Master of Purity”, who most of the legionnaries refer to as the Garden Masters. The Hidden Way also employs gardeners, stonemasons, woodcarvers, musicians, servants, and other laborers.

Some of these are stroll gardens suitable for enjoyable walks, while others are contemplation gardens designed for mediation and prayer. Some are “excitement gardens” which delight the eye immediately, while others are “calming gardens” whose beauty is more subtle. Most of these are walled gardens which require visitors to pass through a series of tori arches to enter.

The 11 Imperial Gardens of Chai Sedo:

Because of the climate and relative lack of water (notwithstanding the artifical ponds, canals, and pools), the 1st Imperial legion is bereft of a bamboo garden, maze garden, temple garden, orchard garden, moat garden, museum garden, residential garden, lake garden, tsukiyama garden, flower garden, or reptile garden. The 11 gardens listed below are the best effort based on what can be supported in this region.

Pond Paradise Garden:

A pond garden, made up of a series of cultivated, artificial ponds, some of which contain fish and even koi, which struggle to survive in this climate, but which are brought in and replaced as needed.

Borrowed Scenery Garden: 

Arguably the most impressive of the Imperial gardens, this is a small artificial “lake” (actually a pool) with a carefully curated sand bar garden reminiscient of the pine sand bar off the coast of Otosan Uchi. The sand bar can be reached either by boat or by walking across a series of stone pillars.

This artificial lake is also artificially seeded with fish, which are brought in mainly from the Firefly river, White Shore Lake, and the River of the Lost Valley. This is the prince’s personal fishery so that he can occasionally eat fresh fish.

Garden of Sunken Sceneries:

A boating garden composed of a set of artificial ponds and canals, with stone and wooden carvings below the surface.

Mossy Stone Triad Garden:

This is the smallest but arguably most impressive of the Imperial gardens, since the semi-arid climate of the area doesn’t support moss.

Garden of Seven Sublimities:

A meditative rock garden cultivated and most frequently visited by the members of Togashi Company.

Beauty of Empty Space Garden:

Dry garden (which some uncultured samurai might confuse with a rock garden) composed of dry streams and rocks and sand to suggest running water, this garden surrounds Chai Sedo itself. A series of bridges of the sort one might see in a temple garden cross the various streams.

Waving Lawn Garden:

A shrub garden whose intent is to showcase all of the plants capable of growing in this climate without transplanted soil or other similar interventions. This is the largest garden and is not walled – by design it’s somewhat unclear precisely where the garden begins and ends at each of its edges. It’s commonly visited by legionnaires, especially walked through at night when it is well-lit by various types of lanterns.

The most common lantern is the hexagonal firebox with two openings and carvings of deer. These lanterns stand on a single solid pillar.

Snow-viewing lanterns stand on three or four legs next to the small pools which dot the landscape. The big umbrella is perfect to catch the falling snow and present it as a soft white hat to the carefully watching eye. Some hanging lanterns are also placed on overhanging pillars and so they can hang over these pools.

The gardeners hide small statues of the Shinsei in different places throughout this garden on stone plates, changing locations frequently.

Snow Rose Garden:

A delightful bonsai garden with as many varieties as can survive in the climate – this includes a number of varieties which are only able to survive because of transplanted soil and the time-consuming tending from the gardeners.

Garden of Pleasure After:

Named for the fact that a wise ruler attends to business first and only indulges in pleasant activities once the work of administration is complete, this is the Prince’s personal courtyard garden.

Some notable things in this garden:

-> A hand washing basin composed of several elements that is in the middle of the garden with two stones on either side. A stepping stone path leads towards a large flat stone in front of the basin on which to stand. Water flows into the basin through a bamboo tube, and a lantern at the back of the basin helps to guide the guest towards it in the evening.

-> A “music jar” buried upside-down in the ground and covered with cobblestones – as water drips through a hole in the bottom of the jar and hits the standing water in its top, it makes a sound reminiscient of a harp.

-> A “deer-scarer”, which is that thing where a bamboo pipe is balanced like a seesaw under a source of flowing water and one end of the bamboo pipe is open and the other is closed. When the open end fills with water, the extra weight causes it to snap down onto a stone or wooden block with that very pleasant soft crack as it tips back into place.

Elements of a Pure Land Garden:

A tea garden with one a gate leading up to the pagoda where tea ceremonies are held. Stepping stones run throughout the garden along its various paths, surrounded by mostly evergreen, non-flowering plants.

Circle of Here Garden:

A study garden dotted with tents and covered gazebos and a small library. The books available are mainly a combination of widely-reproduced classics and cheap pillow books, though the prince’s manor contains a more impressive personal library. 

Now let's talk about the 1st Imperial Legion itself.  Here are some random notes about the structure and layout of companies.

Ranks in the Imperial legion:

Here’s a rough outline of the makeup of a legion.

Unit	Rank of Officer in Charge	Number of samurai troops
Legion	Legion General	~1000
Battlation	Battalion Commander	~200
Company	Company Captain	~50
Platoon	Platoon Lieutenant	~10-15
Squad	Squad Sergeant and Corporal	~4-6

Other notes:

→ A collection of Legions is an Army, commanded by an Army General.

→ A collection of armies is commanded by someone with the title General of the ____ Armies of the ___,_. For example, Daidoji Uji (daimyo of the Daidoji family) has the title, “General of the Southern Armies of the Crane”.

Companies and Houses:

Each House is responsible for providing either part (in the case of small houses) or all (in the case of larger and/or more prestigious houses) of a Company to at least one of the Imperial legions. Some houses provide more than one company, which can be negotiated with the Imperial Ministries of War and Revenue (through the Treasurer and the Shogun and their subordinates) as part of their tax obligation.

Companies are funded entirely by the Houses which provide them. Battalion Commanders are frequently Imperials, especially from the Seppun family, though the 1st Imperial legion is an exception due to its unique mission and history. A small percentage of each company will consist of samurai from other Houses and sometimes other clans, which will sometimes be transferred/assigned for political or personal reasons.

Due to the sought-after benefits of holding a position in the 1st Imperial Legion, out-of-House assignments are more common in a number of the companies (Hiruma company being an outlier for being almost entirely sold-commissions and Togashi company being an outlier in the other direction).

Budget

Each company captain in the 1st Imperial Legion has a several thousand koku budget (typically ~1000 koku higher than a company in a different Imperial legion):

→ Because of the increased rank across the legion, the stipends alone are in excess of 1200 koku.

→ Several hundred additional koku in feeding the troops and support staff – this reflects an increase in the price of good food this far away from the heart of the Empire.

→ Hundreds of koku to pay for the support staff and their expenses – a company has ~50 samurai and about two dozen peasant workers, including unskill or semiskilled labor such as cooks, custodians, launderers, and eta, as as well as skill labor such as smiths to maintain the weapons and armor.

→ Hundreds of koku for equipment. This not only includes the upkeep and replacements of weapons and armor, but also the tents, building materials, ditches and fortifications (these being less common in the 1st legion).

→ Hundreds of koku for religious and cultural celebrations/festivals and the maintenance of the company shrines. Each company has at least three shrines: one for the House’s ancestors and one for each of the clan’s patron fortunes. Such shrines are located to the south or southeast of the rest of the company structures, i.e. between the company and the Shadowlands. These religious expenses include not only the sacred items (e.g. special incense/herbs/flowers) but also the alcohol which is consumed at all such celebrations.

→ Hundreds of koku for gifts and lobbying of the Prince and other important officials above and beyond the expectations of the major gift-giving holidays.

Layout

The 1st legion is mostly made of of tents rather than wooden barracks, due to the harshness of the climate and its effect on wooden buildings.

The standard sleeping tent is ~10×10 feet wide and 6-8 feed high. A typical company has ~8 of these sleeping tents:

→ 4 holding the non-officer legionnaires of the company’s 4 platoons (~8 legionnaires in each)

→ 1 holding the 8 corporals

→ 1 holding the 8 squad sergeants

→ 1 holding the 4 platoon lieutenants

→ 1 holding the company captain

In addition, there are several other much larger tents:

→ an officer’s mess where the corporals, sergeants, lieutenants, and captain dine

→ a legionnaire’s mess where everyone else dines

→ a kitchen tent where the food is prepared

→ a meeting tent large enough to hold the entire company where orders are given

Servants sleep in separate tents which line the outside of the company’s area. These tend to be numerous and smaller since many servants frequently live in the legion long-term with their families.

Eta and the latrines they dig are located outside of the company encampment.

In addition to tents, a company encampment has several buildings, usually made of stone or clay/mud bricks:

→ A granary/storehouse containing provisions.

→ An armory where weapons and armor are kept.

→ A stables where the horses are kept. Unicorn companies tend to have multiple stables and will sometimes have more horses than legionnaires, whereas most companies will have only enough for a single platoon.

Here's some more general information about the area where the 1st Imperial Legion is located, known as the "Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands":

The Twilight Mountains extend along the entire western border of Rokugan. There are various valleys and gaps, the largest of which is a 13-mile valley which separates Shinjo lands on the east side from Moto lands on the west. This valley is known as the Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands.

Chai Sedo is at the north end of the valley and Outsider Keep is at the southern end.

Shiro Moto, which the Moto refer to as Karakoru, is approximately 50 miles west of the valley.

The valley is approximately 100 miles to the northwest of the Shinomen forest. It’s at the edge of the Zenzan domain, which is the westernmost domain in Shinjo lands, approximately 75 miles from Shiro Zenzan, which is built close to White Shore Lake. The entire valley is technically in the Sanfun province, though historically the Imperial Legion has taken responsibility for the valley itself.

Artistic depictions of the valley often show lush green grass on one side and barren desert on the opposite site. In fact the whole area is semi-arid, with about 16 inches of rainfall per year. This is not enough to support much in the way of trees or farms, but there is plenty of vegetation on both sides of the valley. Still, only about 1% of the land is arable, which is why the local village districts are collectively known as the Three Unfortunate Villages of Sanfun, since the land here is poor and its farms tend to be small and spread out. The Provincial City of Saifun, also called Oshindoka Toshi, is said to be “heaven for men and dogs, hell for women and horses”.

Thus, despite its name, the Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands is actually about 400 miles east of the Burning Sands Desert, and about 800 miles east of the city of Medin al Salaat.

Outsider Keep is at the southern end of The Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands next to an old silver mine which has been fully tapped for centuries. The keep itself consists of an outer wall surrounding a large compound of brick buildings.  It is maintained by the Western Star Mining Company (aka The Hidden Way):

Outsider Keep has a large staff of other hinin workers who cost about 800 koku/year to employ:

- ~20 miscellaneous servant laborers (cooks, housekeepers, launderers, butchers, bakers, etc)

- ~20 entertainers (mostly actors and musicians)

- ~20 clerks (scribes, bookkeepers, clerical workers, bursars, etc)

- ~10 personal servants for the Veiled Council

- ~10 stablehands

- ~10 skilled craftspeople (carpenters, stonemasons, metalworkers, tailors, etc)

- ~10 animal handlers and drivers and porters

Many of those listed above live with their families in or around Outsider Keep, though this is significantly more common for the laborers than for the samurai or guards. The total population of Outsider Keep is therefore around/over 400 – around 175 members/employees and the rest being family.

Many of the employees and their families live in tents and yurts in the area outside the walls.

There’s also a large pen of horses outside the walls – see Horse cultures for more information.

Outsider Keep itself is situated at the entrance to the old silver mine, and that mine is used as storage for the silk and silver – there are storerooms inside the old mine which are kept behind thick metal doors.

The Hidden Speakers of the Hidden Way live at Outsider Keep, and therefore there are plenty of amenities. In addition to the company store, there’s a sake house, gambling house, distillery, butcher, bakery, and outdoor theater for the permanent acting troupe which is maintained there. There is no “market day” per se, but occasionally an outdoor bazaar will spring up outside the walls of the keep when enough visiting merchants and customers are present – this has been happening with increasing frequency since there are now so many more wealthy Moto than ever before.

The gambling house and distillery were recently sacked during the Moto invasion, though thankfully the raiders didn’t know about the bounty kept inside the old silver mine.





At this point I feel like I'm mostly just sharing random setting details, but I think there's value in that.  Here's a section on "The Dark Moto".

Bayushi Tangen:

Bayushi Tangen was a warrior-poet who was alive during the return of the Unicorn clan. The Emperor famously asked Tangen to write a treatise on on treachery, duplicity and espionage. Tangen called this book “Lies” and this book is said to best capture the philosophy of the Scorpion clan. A representative quote from “Lies”:

> Akodo speaks eloquently of the virtue of honesty. “No harm can come of the truth,” he says, “and a lie kills someone in the world.” If a lie were to save the Emperor and the truth doom him, I would ask the Lion what he might choose. A lie does indeed kill someone in the world, but what if it saved the Emperor? Who would not give his life for the Son of Heaven? If Lord Akodo is unwilling to do so, I certainly shall take his place.

and

> You may always trust a peasant over a nobleman. The nobleman is ambitious. The peasant only wants to eat. In other words, the nobleman has betrayal in his blood while the peasant only wishes not to be betrayed.

After the return of the Unicorn, it was quickly noticed that a new threat had emerged in the Shadowlands – skeletal riders calling themselves the Black Guard of the Moto. Tangen did not personally perform any investigations into this phenomenon, but his work “The Dark Moto” is viewed as the authoritative source of the subject, and it appears to be Bayushi Tangen who originated that name. Modern editions contain supplemental chapters drawn from subsequent encounters, with quotes and anecdotes.

The copy in Chai Sedo is over 100 years old, and newer editions presumably contain information this copy lacks, though some attached commentaries by past visiting scholars helps to fill in the details.

The Dark Moto:

When the Unicorn returned to Rokugan 200 years ago, they didn’t arrive in one giant army.  There were waves of nobles and peasants and refugees which journeyed across the desert.

A huge part of what makes this kind of desert trip difficult is that even if there’s enough groundwater to provide for all of the humans and animals making the trip, it may be impossible to pull a sufficient quantity of that water out of the existing wells fast enough to keep a large force supplied.  For this reason, most of the Unicorn who returned did not do so along the Ki Rin Trail (although many did).  Most traveled north of Medin al Salaat before heading east.  (When Gaheris finally invades, probably sometime next year, he will likely take this same route in reverse, ultimately approaching Medin al Salaat from north to south rather than from east to west.)

However, not all Unicorn took these routes, and some journeyed south, especially the Moto, whose ancestral homelands are, according to the Chai Sedo library, to the southwest of Medin al Salaat.  (This source takes the conventional wisdom that the Moto are not from here but were recruited by the Unicorn clan while they ruled Medin al Salaat, and that some of the Moto came here for the first time 200 years ago.  Places like Karakoru and Bodi Kaikhan are described as having been Unicorn holdings which were granted to the Moto after the Unicorn returned.)  In particular, many Moto are said to have traveled south along routes towards the Ivory Kingdom before heading northeast to reach the southern end of the Twilight Mountains.

A large contingent of these Moto are said to have run out of water and in desperation entered the Shadowlands, where they were corrupted.  Some of them are said to have tried to return to the Empire anyway, where their former kinsmen turned them away.  The Vindicator Moto declared themselves enemies of the Dark Moto, and each Vindicator swears a vow to his ancestors during his gempukku to always oppose the forces of the Shadowlands and the Dark Moto in particular.

The Dark Moto are now mainly known to the Crab Clan, who occasionally encounter these skeletal riders, who like to prey upon raiding parties returning from successful (or unsuccessful) raids on goblins and ogres in the Shadowlands.  The Dark Moto usually attempt to recruit wounded legionnaires, especially those dying or who have become permanently tainted during their mission, promising immortality and power and the opportunity to do battle against oni in their home turf in Jigoku.

The most characteristic appeal made by Dark Moto trying to recruit wounded legionnaires usually involves some combination of threats (join us or die) and the promise that their work benefits the Crab clan, by stopping Oni Lords such as the Maw before they are able to even enter the Shadowlands to threaten humanity.

Platoons who successfully turn away the Dark Moto without anyone joining their ranks are often told that “The day will come when you seek us out to beg for our assistance” though it is unclear whether this refers to any particular future threat or merely references the general inevitability of death.

Moto Tsume is the leader of the Dark Moto. Kaiu Yoshizo described an encounter with a platoon of Dark Moto led by Moto Tsume in the aftermath of clearing ogres and goblins out of Hiruma Castle. Tsume wields powerful dark magics, and declared to Yoshizo that it was the magics of death that he wielded, granted to him by the Gods of Death, and that this magic was not maho – a claim somewhat undercut by his being a tainted skeleton man riding out from the Deep Shadowlands. Tsume claimed at this time that he and the Dark Moto were fighting on behalf of humanity and for the furtherence of humanity’s interests in the mortal realm against the oni lords of the underworld. This appears to be roughly in line with what Tetsu has read in “The Dark Moto” by Bayushi Tangen.

The Secret Histories of the Moto:

Apparently the Yassa is not the only secret writings of the Moto, and they evidently have secret histories as well. Moto Zolzaya and Moto Khunbish have evidently both read some or all of these secret histories, which contain the Moto version of the Black Guard.

According to Moto Zolzaya, when the Moto returned to their ancestral homelands, they reclaimed ancient shrines such as Bodi Kaikhan. Some of those shrines contained secret teachings and rituals, part of the old ways whose practices had fallen out of use. A man named Moto Tsume was the khan of the Vindicator (Zolzaya informs you that the Vindicator histories place him as their high priest who defied their khan), who performed certain rituals to immortalize himself before he was driven out by the other noble families of the Vindicator. Moto Tsume and his disciples escaped into Jigoku after being surrounded in a siege of Bodi Kaikhan, and evidently one of the chief responsibilities of Vindicator priests is to spiritually ward the walls of Bodi Kaikhan to keep them from being able to re-enter the mortal realm directly from Jigoku. The strength of the Vindicator wards is demonstrated by the fact that the Dark Moto are forced to enter the mortal realm in the Shadowlands, presumably through the Festering Pit of Fu Leng.





WASP BOUNTY HUNTERS

As of this writing, my current campaign is the Wasp Bounty Hunters campaign, which has this three-paragraph description:

It’s been 15 years since Tsuruchi, first of his name, founded the Wasp clan, a minor clan whose charter authorizes all Wasp samurai to pursue Imperial bounties. Because most Imperial magistrates are reluctant to create major political incidents over minor bounties, the Wasp have already settled into an important niche within the landscape of the Emerald Empire.

As a tiny minor clan, the bounties which would be a pittance to even an average-sized House represent a significant fraction of the Wasp Clan’s income. This creates a constant tension between the pursuit of unflinching justice and the temptation of unscrupulous profit. The actions taken by the clan’s samurai in these formative years may determine whether the Tsuruchi name represents honorable enforcers or desperate mercenaries.

The Wasp now stand at the top of the “Three Man Alliance,” a pact between the Wasp, Fox, and Sparrow clans in the southeastern reaches of Rokugan. The PCs serve as yoriki (assistants) to Tsuruchi Kyoma, a close friend of the Wasp daimyo who has been tasked with overseeing bounty operations among their southern allies. While Kyoma focuses on cementing the bonds of the Three Man Alliance through long nights of fellowship and shared cups, his yoriki are left to carry the heavy mantle of administrative and moral authority. Their decisions about which bounties are pursued and how the law is applied will shape the legacy of the Wasp in the eyes of the Empire.

Here's my writeup on the creation of the Wasp clan:

The Spine of the World Mountains bisect the Empire in two, with Beiden Pass being the main passage between the northern and southern halves of the central Empire.  In the eastern Empire, ships are the fastest and most efficient way to move people and goods up and down the coast, and a narrow mountain pass 150 miles inland is the best way to travel from one side of the mountains to the other (as Beiden pass is ~400 miles to the northwest along the mountain range).

This mountain pass is located in the Hachinaga ("long wasp") province, a dynasty province which the Shin lineage has ruled for over a thousand years.  Their progenitor, Bayushi Shin, personally swore fealty to Lord Bayushi, and his descendents later became part of the Kyo vassal house of the Bayushi family, tasked with defending the valuable mountain pass from the Zenji vassal house of the Matsu Family of the Lion Clan to the north.

The Wasp Clan was founded by Tsuruchi, first of his name, and its holdings consist entirely of the mountainous Hachinaga province.

h3. The lives of Tsuruchi's parents

Tsuruchi, first of his name, was born Bayushi no Kyo Tsuruchi, son of Bayushi no Kyo Chitose and Matsu no Zenji Natsu.

Tsuruchi's father Chitose was the provincial governor of Hachinaga.  Chitose was betrothed from childhood to Bayushi no Kyo Ryoko, a member of the wealthy Rui lineage, but as a young man he fell in love with Natsu, a beautiful Matsu bushiko from the neighboring Zenji domain.  The two entered into a torrid romance, and Natsu was already showing signs of her pregnancy in the months leading up to Chitose's wedding.

Chitose had already inherited the governorship of Hachinaga after his father died at sea on a journey north to Otosan Uchi, and his mother had died in childbirth a few months later.  With no living parents to countermand him, he ignored the advice of his aunt, Chancellor Omika, and broke off his engagement to Ryoko.

The powerful Rui lineage convinced Bayushi no Kyo Haruka, the Kyo daimyo, to deny Chitose's permission to marry Natsu.  Governor Chitose might have ignored his daimyo and defied her orders to marry his true love, but Natsu's mother refused to grant her daughter permission to marry under those circumstances, and as a result Natsu herself refused to consent to a marriage.

However, while Natsu's filial piety stopped her from marrying Chitose, she nevertheless moved to Hachinaga Keep to live with Chitose and raise their son, and she continued bearing him children and raising the next generation of the main line of the Shin lineage.  She spent the rest of her life referred to as the governor's "consort" ("Naisai" literally means "inner wife" and is the official term, though Chitose's political enemies referred to her as his "Mekake" or "female servant" / "mistress").

h3. The deaths of Tsuruchi's parents

The cadet line of the Shin lineage had mixed reactions to their governor's romantic choices.  While most of the lineage displayed understanding tolerance, some were privately furious at what they saw as the disgraceful conduct of their leader.  Some are known to have lobbied their daimyo in private to replace Chitose with one of the Shin cousins who would carry the authority of the Kyo house with more dignity.

Daimyo Haruka refused to entertain such ideas, which she felt would bring instability to the do, though the Rui lineage supported these efforts, presumably in revenge for Governor Chitose's broken bethrothal to their lineage member Ryoko (who is now married to the Deputy Minister of Retainers).  However, the Rui lineage continued to scheme against Chitose's parents at every turn, often with the support of disgruntled members of the Shin cadet line.

In the winter of 1110 (which is 20 years before the start of this campaign), Governor Chitose hosted a banquet, to which many of his consort Natsu's Lion family were invited.  Natsu's mother had passed, but her brother Matsu no Zenji Ginjiro and his children and many of her other cousins were present.

There was much drinking, and memories of the details of this event are fuzzy and disputed.  However, an altercation broke out between the visiting Matsu and their Bayushi hosts, as often happens at events in which both Lion and Scorpion samurai are present.  This quickly escalated into an enormous brawl.  While no one had their swords present and thus most of the damage was done with fists, but hidden knives were unsheathed during the altercation.

No official determinations of guilt were made by Imperial magistrates, but the following facts are reliably attested to during the inquest undertaken by Seppun Shizuko (the Imperial magistrate for the Kyo domain):
* Kyo Fumikazu (a cadet line Shin lineage courtier, and the first cousin of Governor Chitose) argued with Zenji Fudo (Natsu's second cousin), and eventually Fudo threw a drunken punch.
* A room-wide fight **immediately** broke out, quickly enough that Seppun Shizuko postulated preplanning on the part of some participants, though with punches being thrown by both sides and memories fuzzy it was impossible to determine who was responsible for the escalation.  The poor recollection of many participants led Magistrate Shizuko to postulate that some of sake may have been drugged, though this was never proven.
* Governor Chitose and his consort Natsu were seated next to Natsu's brother Ginjiro and his two children.  Ginjiro and his children were knocked unconscious early in the fight and were unable to testify as to who they fought.
* Chitose and Natsu and their two younger children were all stabbed to death in the fight, and fine daggers of Matsu manufacture with Lion engravings on the handguard were found buried in the bodies of Chitose and Natsu.
* Tsuruchi and his two siblings were seated on the other side of their parents, and when the fight broke out, he and his friend (and drinking buddy) Kyo Kyoma leapt into action, first trying to break up the fight and then quickly being drawn into it.
* Kyoma noticed Kyo Fumikazu (the man whose argument started this brawl) approaching Tsuruchi from behind with a drawn knife which was already covered in blood.  He cried out, attacking Fumikazu before Tsuruchi could be stabbed in the back.  Kyoma killed Fumikazu while fighting back-to-back with Tsuruchi.
* The Lion guests were outnumbered by their Scorpion hosts, and so they were all eventually subdued.  The only Lion who died was Zenji Nozomi, one of Natsu's first cousins and the daughter of her brother Ginjiro.  Her forehead was caved in after hitting the edge of the banquet table.  It is unclear whether this happened before or after Governor Chitose and his consort and two younger children were killed.

h3. Tsuruchi's brief governorship

Tsuruchi immediately concluded that his Lion cousins were **not** responsible, and that treacherous members of the Shin cadet line had sought to remove him so that they could take over the lineage and its rulership of the Hachinaga province.  However, with the traitor Fumikazu having died attempting to assassinate him, Tsuruchi couldn't be sure who was and wasn't involved.

Tsuruchi first demanded that Fumikazu's immediate family denounce Fumikazu, and they refused.  Tsuruchi immediately expelled them from the province, sending them to Shiro Kyo and petitioning Daimyo Haruka to conduct her own inquest and sentence those she believed responsible to death.  Tsuruchi then proceeded to demand that all loyal members of the Shin lineage denouce not only the treacherous Fumikazu, but the other members of the Shin lineage who had refused to do so.

After Tsuruchi's uncle Ginjiro returned home following the banquet and conducted funeral rites for his daughter, he advised his own daimyo, Zenji Kana, that Hachinaga Keep was now lightly defended, and was ripe for conquest.  It had been a Lion province in the past, and could be again.  Ginjiro was but a mere clerk of the 8th Rank in the Zenji Ministry of War, but with his intimate knowledge of Hachinaga Keep and its surrounding fortifications and landscape he was appointed as the general of the invasion force.

Ginjiro force-marched his small army and quickly laid siege to Hachinaga Keep.  Surrounding it on all sides and cutting off any attempts to send for reinforcements to the Kyo capital (though the siege would surely be noticed before long).

Under a banner of truce, Tsuruchi met with his uncle Ginjiro.  He appealed his kinship with the Lion, declaring that he and Ginjiro had a common enemy in the treacherous Scorpion members of the Kyo house who had murdered Ginjiro's daughter and Tsuruchi's siblings and parents.  Tsuruchi further declared that Daimyo Haruka had broken loyalty with the Shin, first by not permitting the marriage of his parents, and now by failing to prosecute the treacherous members of the Shin cadet line who had assassinated them.

Tsuruchi swore that he and all loyal members of the Shin lineage were prepared to swear fealty to Zenji Kana as their new daimyo and join the Kana as a new lineage of the Kana House of the Matsu Family, renouncing their Scorpion loyalties and becoming Lion, so long as the Shin were permitted to retain their status as a dynasty lineage with authority over the Hachinaga province.

Ginjiro stated that he had not been given the authority to accept such a bargain on behalf of his daimyo, but promised to send a swift messenger to Shiro Zenji.  He swore that he would advocate for this outcome, and convey Tsuruchi's sincerity and honor to Daimyo Kana.

Ginjiro did indeed send a letter, and his daimyo's reply ordered him to refuse Tsuruchi's surrender and attack the keep.  He did, and after a brief siege, the Shin defenses were overwhelmed and an injured Tsuruchi offered Isshin, the ancestral sword of the Shin lineage, to his uncle as part of a negotiated surrender in the great hall of the keep.  Tsuruchi declared that it was better for his mother's brother to honor this sword and for it to stay in its ancestral lands than for it to be placed in the hands of his treacherous Scorpion cousins.

The surviving members of the Shin lineage were set free to return to the Kyo domain, though many of them, including Tsuruchi himself, were unwilling to continue serving a daimyo who they perceived to have broken loyalty with them, and also unwilling to swear fealty to a Lion daimyo who had previously rejected them.

Thus, Tsuruchi and many of his former retainers became ronin, and Tsuruchi's uncle Ginjiro was appointed as the new provincial governor of Hachinaga.

h3. Tsuruchi's career as an Imperial bounty hunter

In the years that followed, Tsuruchi was granted a post as an Imperial magistrate, and took on the role of a bounty hunter.  It turned out that there are often matters serious enough to generate an Imperial bounty, but not serious enough to cause Imperial magistrates to spend their limited time and attention seeking out people who are being sheltered by their families.  Indeed, in many politically touchy cases, some Imperial magistrates are loathe to disturb the Emperor's peace by forcing a standoff with locals over matters which, on the scale of Imperial concerns, are relatively minor.  Thus, it is often the case that samurai with Imperial bounties on their heads can live out their lives in quiet obscurity, with their families claiming that they have not seen their wayward relatives.

Tsuruchi no longer had any family to be drawn into the political fallout from targeted well-connected fugitives, and he quickly became infamous throughout the Empire for his ruthless devotion to seeking out those who dared defy the Emperor's justice.  While some Imperial bounty hunters famed in history for adopting a similar philosophy have often challenged their targets to duels so that they have a chance to die honorably, Tsuruchi preferred to employ his mastery of the bow in striking down such targets, declaring:

bq). A single arrow, a single life.

Tsuruchi's Imperial yoriki (assistants) began as a small group of former Shin samurai, but soon were joined by others who were brave enough and free enough from entangling family concerns (mostly but not entirely other ronin).

Many of the bounties Tsuruchi collected were put out by the Crane clan, who often had the money necessary to register Imperial bounty against those wanted for infractions recognized by Imperial magistrates.  The Crane were grateful that many of these bounties, which would have previously gone uncollected, were now resulting in their targets being brought to justice.  Tsuruchi thus earned himself many well-connected Crane friends, even as he made himself powerful enemies throughout the rest of the Empire.  A few Crane have expressed a sense of betrayal when Tsuruchi has accepted bounties on Crane samurai, but the wise and powerful Crane courtiers who control the Imperial courts have publicly commended Tsuruchi's unflinching sense of justice.

h3. Tsuruchi's revenge

Two years after Tsuruchi became a ronin, the Crane clan was able, through their agents, to obtain a copy of the letter which Tsuruchi's uncle Ginjiro sent to Daimyo Kana, in which he had sworn to advocate for Tsuruchi and the Shin lineage.  This is the text of the letter in its entirety:

bq). To my daimyo, the Lady Matsu no Zenji Kana, I submit this report from the front.
bq). Bayushi no Kyo Tsuruchi has offered to surrender if he and his lineage are permitted to swear fealty to you and continue administering the Hachinaga province under your authority.  I believe Tsuruchi would serve you loyally as an honorable retainer if you accept.  That said, my tactical assessment is that due to the meager skeleton force remaining in Hachinaga Keep, we can most certainly take the fortress with a minimum of casualties.
bq). Matsu no Zenji Ginjiro, General of the Expeditionary Force, bowing in service.

When Tsuruchi was presented with a copy of this letter, he was furious.  He declared his uncle an oathbreaker, having forsworn himself in his promise to Tsuruchi in order to greedily obtain a governorship for himself.

Kakita Yoshi, the Imperial Chancellor, had personally vouched for the authenticity of the letter, and personally met with Tsuruchi to present it to him.  Yoshi promised that if Tsuruchi were able to gather enough ronin and mercenaries to take vengeance on his uncle Ginjiro and retook Hachinaga Keep, then the Crane clan would formally back the creation of a new Minor Clan so that Tsuruchi could resume rulership of his ancestral lands without being forced to serve either the Lion or Scorpion clans who had now both betrayed him.

Yoshi cautioned Tsuruchi that he could not guarantee that the Imperial Chancellary would back the Crane position, nor that the Emperor would approve the proposal.  The Lion and Scorpion Clans would certainly both oppose this, though the Crane would be eager to deny their rivals this strategically important mountain pass and would therefore fully back the effort in lobbying the other Great Clans.  Tsuruchi was willing to take the risk, and within two years he had made his preparations and launched his surprise attack on Hachinaga Keep, infiltrating its fortifications and scattering its defenders before they could respond.

When his uncle Ginjiro made his own surrender to Tsuruchi in the great hall of the keep, Tsuruchi accepted back his ancestral sword Isshin.  He offered to allow Ginjiro to commit seppuku to cleanse the stain of dishonor from his family, and when Ginjiro stated that he had abided by his word and carried no dishonor, Tsuruchi drove the sword Isshin into the floor of the great hall, snapping it in two, declaring that it had been tainted by the Ginjiro's treachery and using its broken shard to execute his uncle.  He then released the other Lion survivors, declaring that they had served their daimyo admirably and honorably and that he held no animus towards any surviving member of the Zenji House.

Yoshi quickly arranged for a prestigious Imperial delegation to be accept Tsuruchi's invitation to Hachinaga Keep, which forestalled any attempt by either the Lion or Scorpion to attack the keep, as those guests would have been honor-bound to fight in its defense.  This delay provided enough time for the Imperial Chancellary to recommend the creation of the Wasp clan, and the Emperor signed the new clan charter, making Tsuruchi the first of his name and daimyo of the new Tsuruchi family.

h3. Tsuruchi's legacy

It has been 15 years since the Wasp clan was created.  At the urging of the Crane clan, and in recognition of Tsuruchi's personal accomplishments as a bounty hunter, the Wasp Clan charter grants all Wasp samurai the authority to act as Imperial magistrates for the purpose of pursuing Imperial bounties.  This makes every Wasp a potential bounty hunter, even if most Wasp samurai have other duties to attend to.

Because the Wasp domain is very small (it was a single small but strategically important province), the bounties they collect, which would be a pittance for even an average-sized domain, represent a significant fraction of the Wasp Clan income.  This has sometimes led to questionable methods from less scrupulous Wasp bounty hunters in their methods and tactics, and the Clan's long-term reputation is still very much in the process of being determined.

Among other things, it remains to be seen whether Tsuruchi's particular idiosyncracies will become the standard for the Wasp in generations to come.  The most notable example is swords: Tsuruchi has left the broken blade of his ancestral sword Isshin embedded in the floor of the great hall of Hachinaga Keep, where it is seen by visitors.  The broken hilt and base of the blade are displayed on the alter of an ancestral shrine in the corner of the same room.  Tsuruchi himself has not chosen another sword, using only borrowed swords when necessary, declaring that there shall be no Ancestral Sword of the Wasp, and refusing to so much as carry a sword while at home in Hachinaga Keep.

Because their daimyo exhibits this behavor, many of Tsuruchi's retainers have chosen to show deference to their lord by mimicing his behavior, and as such it is rare to see a Wasp clan samurai carrying a sword in Hachinaga Keep.  And because many guests worry about offending the sensibilities of their hosts, visitors to Hachinaga Keep also frequently shed their daisho before entering.  Such things lead many to wonder how a clan willing to so flagrantly violate ancient traditions can long survive, and whether the next generation of Wasp will revert to the more accepted ways of bushido.

Here is a timeline of events related to the Wasp (charting many of the events described above) and weaving in events relevant to past campaigns as a reference for new and returning players:

As a reminder, the Karmic Inquisitors campaign took place in the winter of 1129 and ended in the 1st month of 1130.  This campaign begins two months later, in the 3rd month of 1130 (the final month of spring).

| *Year* | *Events* |
| *???* | At the dawn of the Empire, the warrior Shin swears fealty to Lord Bayushi, who grants Bayushi Shin authority over Hachinaga pass, an important mountain passage through the Spine of the World Mountains.
A nearby warlord named Myo also swears fealty to Lord Bayushi and is permitted to retain his existing territory as a loyal retainer of the newly founded Scorpion clan. |
| 417 | During the reign of Hantei the Tenth and the establishment of the Six Ministries, the descendants of Bayushi Shin formally swear fealty to the descendants of Bayushi Myo, and the Shin lineage is formally recognized as the provincial lineage with rulership the Hachinaga province and granted a seat on the Myo chancellary. |
| 1088 | Bayushi no Kyo Chitose becomes the latest Shin lineage governor of Hachinaga. |
| 1089 | Governor Chitose enters into a torrid love affair with Matsu no Zenji Natsu, a bushi-ko from the neighboring Lion domain. |
| 1090 | Chitose breaks off the his engagement with Bayushi no Kyo Ryoko, but is denied permission from his daimyo to marry his true love. |
| 1091 | Chitose and Natsu celebrate the birth of their first child. |
| 1105 | Chitose and Natsu's eldest son chooses the name Tsuruchi for himself at his gempukku. |
| 1110 | Bayushi no Kyo Chitose hosts a late winter banquet, inviting his consorts Lion family members from the neighboring Zenji vassal house of the Matsu family.  He and his consort are both assassinated during a brawl which appears to have been staged as cover for these killings. |
| 1111 | Matsu no Zenji Ginjiro force marches a hastily assembled army to take Hachinaga Keep.  Tsuruchi offers to have the entire Shin lineage swear fealty to the Zenji daimyo, and is refused.  Ginjiro captures the keep, accepts Tsuruchi's surrender, takes possession of the ancestral sword of the lineage (Isshin), and releases Tsuruchi and the other remaining survivors.  Ginjiro is appointed as the new Lion governor of the Hachinaga province. |
| 1112 | After becoming an Imperial magistrate, Tsuruchi takes many of his former retainers on as his yoriki (assistants / lieutenants) and quickly makes a name for himself as a ruthlessly effective bounty hunter. |
| 1113 | Kakita Yoshi, the Imperial chancellor, meets with Tsuruchi and shares Ginjiro's, revealing the perfidity of Tsuruchi's uncle and offering Crane support if Tsuruchi wishes to seek vengeance.  |
| 1114 | While he continues remitting bounties with impressive ferocity, Tsuruchi gathers an increasingly large collection of allies and mercenaries as he and his former retainers begin planning the retaking of Hachinaga Keep. |
| 1115 | Tsuruchi and his retainers infiltrate Hachinaga Keep after a late winter thaw and overwhelm its defenses.  After his uncle Ginjiro surrenders and returns the sword Isshin while refusing to admit wrongdoing, Tsuruchi drives the ancestral sword into the floor of the great hall, snapping it in two and using the broken base of the sword to execute his uncle. |
| 1116 | The Imperial chancellary approves Kakita Yoshi's proposal to create a new minor clan, elevating Tsuruchi to the position of Wasp clan daimyo.  The Emperor accepts his chancellary's recommendation and signs the Wasp clan charter, granting all Wasp clan samurai the authority to pursue Imperial bounties. 
Akodo no Damasu Kojima, daimyo of the Damasu house, executes a Tsume noble for smuggling without bringing the matter before any Imperial magistrate. |
| 1117 | Tsuruchi and the daimyo of the Fox and Sparrow clans form the [[Three Man Alliance]].
Doji no Tsume Retsu, daimyo of the the Tsume house, invades Toshi Ranbo in retaliation, taking the city in a sneak attack immediately after a giant flood which prevented any immediate reinforcements from other Lion domains.  Kojima is killed along with most of his extended family and almost all of his high-ranking retainers from the Damasu chancellary and ministries. |
| 1118 | Tsuruchi marries Doji Naomi (who becomes Tsuruchi Naomi), the youngest daughter of Doji Kuwanen.
The Lion clan attempts to retake the city after the spring thaw.  Doji Chuto, General of the Northern Armies of the Crane, successfully defends it, killing Akodo Toturi's brother, resulting in Toturi becoming the next daimyo of the Lion clan. |
| 1120 | The prophet Baiten reveals that the next Day of Thunder is at hand.
Prince Hantei Fukuhachi prevents the government of Toshi Ranbo from prosecuting Baiten.
The prophet Baiten returns to the city and is murdered - it later becomes apparent this was ordered by the moon cultist Imperial Magistrate Shinjo Jotsu.
Jotsu's Imperial magistrate colleague Otaku Taira becomes a ronin and goes on a religious pilgrimage to gather forces to oppose the moon cult. |
| 1121 | The Lion Clan retake the city of Toshi Ranbo, escalating tensions and triggering a buildup of troops on both sides of the border. |
| 1122 | The Lion/Crane war begins. |
| 1123 | The Day of Thunder occurs.
Bayushi Shoju is murdered.  His brother, Bayushi Aramoro later marries his widow, Bayushi Kachiko.
Hida Kisada is wounded, and his oldest daighter Hida O-Ushi, the Crab Thunder, is killed.
Jama no Iuchiban Kohaku arrives late to the Day of Thunder, fails to stop the 7 Thunders from defeating Shinjo Jotsu, and takes revenge by slaying the remaining Thunders.  Oni no Kohaku kills hundreds of samurai before being slain.  Kohaku announces that all loyal moon cultists should take refuge in Kyuden Shinjo, where the moon cult remains strong. |
| 1124 | Shinjo Hanari executes Shinjo Yokatsu for high treason against the Empire, and declares a blood debt on his line, and becomes daimyo of the Unicorn clan. |
| 1127 | The Black Scrolls are opened and recharged at the Forgotten Tomb.
Kuni Yori is executed for high treason against the Empire for experimenting with moon cultists and the practice of maho.  Kuni Utagu becomes the new Jade Champion.
Iuchi Shahai and the remaining moon cultists attempt to assassinate the Emperor at Imperial Winter Court at Kyuden Shinjo.
Shinjo Hanari excecutes Iuchi Daiyu, the daimyo of the Iuchi family (and Shahai's father), and declares a blood debt on Shahai's line.  Iuchi Morijiro (a priest rather than a bushi) becomes daimyo of the Iuchi family. |
| 1128 | The Crab clan, under the direction of the Kuni Witch hunters, begin experimenting with the Black Scrolls. |
| 1129 | The kumosaya fungal blight destroys half of the Damasu rice and soybean crop. |
| 1130 | Tsuruchi Naomi begins considering suitors for her eldest son Ichiro (the future daimyo of the Wasp). |





THE MEASURE OF STANDING AND THE ACCORDANCES OF RANK

The Wasp Bounty Hunters campaign is one in which the specifics of rank and money are especially important, even by the standards of Rokugan.  Here are some notes about this:

At the dawn of the Empire, the Lady Doji established the **Measure of Standing**, the system determining what actions are and aren't appropriate between members of different ranks.

All samurai have a rank, and there are 15 ranks.  This is an in-universe system of ordering the peerage of the Empire.  The Emperor is the only person who is "of the fifteenth rank", and a samurai just past their gempukku with no government post and no immediate family of a high rank is "of the first rank".

h3. Baseline ranks

This is the current standard baseline of what types of people inhabit the various ranks (this has changed somewhat from the early days of the Empire, at which time there were only ten ranks):
* Rank 15: the Emperor (and no one else)
* Rank 14: Clan Daimyo
* Rank 13: Family Daimyo
* Rank 12: House Daimyo
* Rank 11: Chancellor
* Rank 10: Minister
* Rank 9: Deputy Minister
* Rank 8: Governor
* Rank 7: Provincial Minister
* Rank 6: Deputy Provincial Minister
* Rank 5: County Magistrate
* Rank 4: Squad Sergeant
* Rank 3: Corporal
* Rank 2: rank and file legionnaires
* Rank 1: unposted samurai with no higher-ranking immediate family

Ranks have an "upper" and "lower" level, which we usually represent with decimals on character sheets, e.g. "Rank 7.5" would be referred to as "the upper seventh rank" and "Rank 7.0" would be referred to as "the lower seventh rank".

h3. Accordances of Rank

Once the Lady Doji had detailed the Measure of Standing, she proceeded to establish the **Accordances of Rank**, which detail the rights, privileges, and restrictions which samurai nobles must respect in relation to one another and to the lower classes, i.e. heimen (half-people) and hinin (non-people).

To this day, Lady Doji's guidance continues to dictate all aspects of life, ranging from:
* the clothing that can be worn by people of different classes and ranks
* under what circumstances someone is expected to greet another by nodding, bowing, scraping, kneeling, pressing one's head to the floor, etc
* the provisions of hospitality, e.g. under what circumstances a host should merely provide room and board for a guest, as opposed to being expected to give up their own quarters to an honored guest

Money (and the monetary value of certain gifts) is also one of the Accordances of Rank:
* The stipend a samurai receives from their daimyo should be the square of their formal Rank, i.e. people of the seventh rank should have a stipend of 49 koku per year.  (This is the same for people of both the upper and lower seventh rank, i.e. people whose characters sheets say Rank 7.0 and Rank 7.5.)
* When a gift is given, the value of the gift is always based on the rank of the highest-ranking person involved, regardless of whether that person is on the giving or receiving side.
* A **courtesy gift** is given when visiting the home or office of someone with whom you have an established personal or professional relationship.  A courtesy gift has no expectation of value, regardless of the relative ranks of those involved.  ("I happened to pass by a fruit vendor on the way over here and thought you might enjoy a fresh persimmon"  would be equally appropriate for a clerk of the second rank or a member of the Imperial Chancellary, provided you are already friends or colleagues.)
* A **token gift** should be given by anyone visiting the home or office of someone with whom they do not have a close personal or professional relationship.  The value of that gift should be zeni equal to the highest rank of anyone involved.
** When a retainer is visiting directly on behalf of a higher-ranking official, the rank of their master is used, but if the retainer is merely carrying out their general duties, then the retainer's rank is used.
** When a guest is meeting with a subordinate, the rank of the head of their office or household is used rather than the rank of the subordinate who is representing their master.
* When making a request which would require their host to expend an extra effort above and beyond the normal day-to-day responsibilities of their position, a **consideration gift** is appropriate.  The expected value of a consideration gift should be counted in bu rather than zeni (i.e. bu equal to the rank of the highest-ranking person involved).
* A **compensatory gift** is called for when making a request which is understood to be especially burdensome.  The value of a compensatory gift should be counted in koku rather than bu.
* Above and beyond these baseline gifts, guests and petitioners are expected to provide an **indemnity gift** to account for extra expenses incurred by requests which rise above the expectations of normal duty and hospitality.

h3. The Doctrine of Three Steps

Interactions between people of different ranks are governed by the **Doctrine of Three Steps**:
* Two people are of **peer standing** if they are no more than 1 rank apart.
* Two people are of **accordant standing** if they are no more than 3 ranks apart, and are otherwise of **discordant standing** with respect to one another.
* Some interactions require peer standing and others merely require accordant standing.
* These comparisons use only the baseline numbers, e.g. someone of the upper seventh rank is of peer standing with someone of the lower sixth rank, despite there being a "1.5 rank" difference between them.
* A person's **merits** may raise or lower their status for the purpose of determining their peer standing with respect to others of accordant standing, but does not alter their discordant standing among significantly higher or lower ranked individuals.
** Players can think of merits as the advantages and disadvantages which affect their perceived rank, though magistrates may take other things into account.  The legal standard for considering merits (as originally defined by Soshi Saibankan) is **the totality of circumstance**, which can include anything the magistrate considers relevant.

The Accordances of Rank apply the Doctrine of Three Steps to dictate everything from banquet seating:
* Two people must be of accordant standing to eat at the same small table.
* When sizeable groups are seated around a large table (e.g. the banquet table of a lord's great hall), they must be ordered such that all are seated beside others of accordant standing.
* When small groups of discordant standing eat around the same large table, a respectful distance must be maintained between them, proportionate to their differences in rank.

...to challenging other samurai to duels:
* Challenges are considered **proper** or **improper** irrespective of rank.  What constitutes grounds for a proper challenge has nothing to do with rank, but whether a proper challenge must be accepted is determined by the rank of the parties involved.
* A samurai MUST accept proper challenges from an equal or higher ranking bushi.
* A samurai MAY **dismiss** a proper challenge from a lower ranking samurai who is of discordant standing, i.e. a samurai more than 3 **formal ranks** (i.e. your legal rank, not considering merit) below you is always **dismissible**.
* In other words, a samurai more than 3 ranks above another is **beyond the reach** of the challenger even if the challenge is valid.
* Conversely, the Doctrine of Three Steps dictates that a higher-ranking challenged party is **within the reach** of the challenger (such that the challenger is not dismissible) if there are no more than 3 formal ranks between them.
* A samurai MUST accept a proper challenge from a lower-ranking bushi of peer standing.
** As mentioned above, while accordant standing is determined by formal rank, peer standing is adjusted by the merits of each party.
** Therefore a magistrate might rule that after considering the merits of two samurai of accordant standing, the totality of circumstance grants the challenger peer standing with the challenged party despite being of lower rank, and thus a proper challenge must be accepted.

The Doctrine of Three Steps also requires that no samurai may be more than 3 ranks lower than their immediate family members (parents, spouses, siblings, and children).
* For example, if a family member is promoted to the eighth rank, any members of their immediate family are immediately raised to the fifth rank if they were previously at a lower rank.
* A samurai must be of a lower rank than their superior, so depending on the circumstances, the promotion of a family member may require a samurai to leave their post.  ("My deepest apologies, but my brother's new duties are heavy, and I am called to assist him in his new position.  The Ministry of Retainers will no doubt select my replacement in short order.")
* In other cases, such a promotion might trigger the minor elevation of a superior to the upper rank.  ("Congratulations on your promotion to the upper fifth rank.  Coincidentally, I myself have just been elevated to the lower fifth rank as a result of my brother's recent appointment.  It appears to have been a favorable season, has it not?")

h3. Investigations and bounties

The Doctrine of Three Steps limits which magistrates can interview other samurai in the course of an investigation (or in pursuit of a bounty).  It is always a samurai's prerogative to call upon another samurai of lower rank, but even duly authorized magistrates and bounty hunters are dismissible by someone "beyond their reach".  Such investigators must therefore be of accordant standing with those they wish to interview.  While some samurai may deign to meet with and answer questions posed by lower-ranking officials of discordant standing, this is unusual and not something to ever be expected.

To execute an arrest, a magistrate or bounty hunter must be of peer standing with their target.  Even possessing a lawful warrant is not sufficient to proceed with the capture of a target without possessing sufficient rank.  As per the Accordances of Rank, the merits of an investigator may elevate someone from merely being of accordant standing to being considered of peer standing with a target, in which case they may proceed to detain such a target.  (Of course, there may be disagreement in the moment about the weight of the respective merits, and occasionally such matters are ultimately decided through deeds, not words.)

Magistrates and bounty hunters must exercise caution in their investigations to ensure that they do not forget their place.  Samurai whose rank is within reach of investigators but who are too highly ranked to be of peer standing with those investigators may decline to personally meet with them, foisting such meetings off on underlings.

Of course, in many circumstances, some samurai prefer to press forward and make an arrest if they believe they know all that's needed to press forward, trusting that victory will be sufficient justification, in the event that the matter is ever brought before an Imperial magistrate for review.





BOUNTIES

The Wasp Clan Charter grants all Wasp samurai the authority to pursue Imperial bounties.  How do those work?

h3. Registering a bounty

Fugitives often flee the jurisdiction where they are wanted, and crossing clan boundaries to hide amongst the enemies of the magistrates who seek them.

Even when they don't cross clan boundaries, it is Imperial magistrates who are responsible for notifying other jurisdictions about a fugitive on the run.  "Soshi Saibankan":https://hiddenway.obsidianportal.com/wikis/soshi-saibankan helped formalize these procedures during the reign of Hantei the Tenth, which may include:

* Providing waystations along Imperial roads with descriptions of fugitives.
* Including notices of criminals at large in their regular correspondence with Imperial magistrates from neighboring domains.
* Assembling bulletins of the current outstanding list of wanted individuals to be distributed to local authorities in their jurisdiction.
* Registering and disseminating notices of duly attested bounties for targets of interest.

As with most formal matters in the Emerald Empire, bounties are governed by the [[Doctrine of Three Steps]]:
* Any samurai may always register a bounty for another samurai of equal or lower rank.
* In order to register a bounty for a high-ranking samurai, the Imperial magistrate must determine the petitioner to be of **peer standing** with the target.  At a high level:
** the petitioner's adjusted rank, taking into account both parties' **merits** (e.g. advantages and disadvantages which affect perceived rank), must end up being no more than 1 rank below the other samurai
** additionally, in order to qualify as being of peer standing with another samurai, your **formal rank** (i.e. what it says on your character sheet) must be no more than 3 ranks different from theirs

Here is how the monies involved in a bounty are handled:
* When a bounty is registered, a **token gift** (zeni equal to the rank of the highest ranking person involved) is given, or a **courtesy gift** (no expectation of value) if the petitioner already has a personal or professional relationship with the Imperial magistrate.
* The Imperial magistrate must have jurisdiction over the matter.  This generally means that someone involved must be from the magistrate's jurisdiction, or the subject of the inquiry (e.g. a crime) must have occurred there.
* If the Imperial magistrate accepts the bounty, an **indemnity gift** of a tithe (10%) of the total bounty must be paid immediately.
* The target of the bounty must generally be turned over to the Imperial magistrate who registered the bounty, at which point the bounty is paid out.
** Generally the Imperial magistrate will pay out the remainder and then be reimbursed from the person who posted the bounty, though for exceptionally large bounties the Imperial magistrate may need to wait for the petitioner to produce the payment.
** If the target was killed resisting arrest, then it is still traditional to bring their head to the Imperial magistrate who registered the bounty.  However, due to the difficulties involved, a bounty may be disbursed by the local Imperial magistrate in such a case, who will then write to their colleague about the matter to initiate the chain of reimbursement.  Such an action would surely require a **consideration gift** (and possibly an **indemnity gift** if the amount or distance was large enough) if the bounty hunter lacked a pre-existing relationship with the local Imperial magistrate.
* Traditionally, a samurai who collects a bounty keeps half of the bounty.  Their superior gets a tithe (10%) of the posted amount, and the remainder goes to the daimyo's treasury.

h3. An example bounty

Shinjo Yoshi is visiting Scorpion lands.  While in Ryoko Owari he becomes inebriated, and takes offense at a perceived slight by Shosuro no Michio Takashi.  Yoshi attacks Takashi without warning, severely injuring him.  When he sobers up the next morning, Yoshi realizes that he may be arrested or challenged to a duel or both, and decides to immediately leave the city and return home.

Takashi is wealthy and vengeful enough that his family immediately visits Hantei Sukune, the local Imperial magistrate for the Michio house, who is posted to Ryoko Owari.  Sukune is of the eleventh rank, but Takashi's aunt, Shosuro no Michio Mitsu is the chancellor of his lineage, and because she frequently sees Sukune at social events, she is not expected to provide a token gift of 11 zeni and merely brings a courtesy gift.

Mitsu registers a 100 koku bounty, immediately paying an additional 10 koku to Sukune to cover the cost and hassle of sending out notice of such a large bounty.  Neither party is certain that the remaining 100 koku will ever be paid, since Yoshi will likely be hidden by his family back in Unicorn lands, where he can spend his time "out in the provinces" away from the prying eyes of the Imperial magistrate for the Shinjo house, Seppun Toshiken.

Realistically, with turbulent times in the aftermath of the Lion/Unicorn war, and the fallout from the continued existence of the Moon Cult in Unicorn lands, Seppun Toshiken has his hands full already and will have very little time to dispatch his yoriki to hunt wayward fugitives.  Even if a local peasant informant reported the whereabouts for a finder's fee (usually a tithe of the bounty, once collected), Toshiken would be required to navigate the overlapping loyalties and family connections of the local Shinjo, spending his own social and political capital in order to settle the matter of a barfight which occurred hundreds of miles away.

Enter the Wasp clan.  Tsuruchi Mukami doesn't care about the hurt feelings of the Shinjo, and learns of the bounty against Shinjo Yoshi from checking the local bulletin in Kyuden Ikoma.  Because he is already close to the Shinjo domain, he crosses the Drowned Merchant River and attempts to discern where Yoshi is hiding.

Mukami quickly discovers that Yoshi has not bothered to leave Kyuden Shinjo!  He has reverted to using his childhood nickname "Yaku", but it doesn't take Mukami long to determine that "Shinjo Yaku" is in fact Shinjo Yoshi.  Mukami expected to expend considerable resources finding Yoshi, and had anticipated needing to promise a 10% finder's fee, but in the end he needed to spend only a few bu greasing local palms to track down Yoshi's favorite drinking spots.

Mukami lies in wait for Yoshi, and one evening when Yoshi emerges from a local drinking house, Mukami steps out of an alleyway and announces himself, declaring that Yoshi must surrender himself and journey back to Ryoko Owari to answer the charges against him.

Yoshi quicky turns to flee, and Mukami instantly raises his bow and fires a single arrow into Yoshi's back.  Yoshi's friends look on in dismay and rage, but they decline to interfere with an Imperial bounty hunter, especially with so many witnesses on the street.  However, Mukami immediately withdraws, as he is uncertain what Yoshi's friends would do if he tried to take Yoshi's head here and now.

Yoshi is dead within the hour, and so Mukami pays a visit to Seppun Toshiken.  Given the circumstances and the desire of Yoshi's family to bury him without interference, Mukami suggests that it should not be necessary to bring his head back to Ryoko Owari, and that Yoshi's body should remain here in Kyuden Shinjo.  Given the circumstances, Mukami provides a 13-bu consideration gift, in understanding of the difficulties of this messy affair.

Toshiken disburses the 100 koku bounty to Mukami, who immediately returns to Kyuden Ikoma, where he will be safe from any retaliation.  Upon his return, he hands 50 koku to Tsuruchi Okame, the Wasp clan's ambassador to the Ikoma family, who oversees all bounty collection for the region.  Okame keeps 10 koku for herself, and sends the remaining 40 koku home to the Wasp clan treasury.  Because it is an especially large bounty, she includes a letter to her daimyo commending Mukami for his skillful execution of his mission.

(Behind the scenes, Seppun Toshiken's staff writes to Hantei Sukune's staff, informing them of what occurred.  Because this amount is a pittance to the Imperials involved, Sukune immediately sends the 100 koku reimbursement to Toshiken, and doesn't even bother to collect her own repayment from Shosuro Mitsu until the following week, when she happens to be in Ryoko Owari's southern district on other business and finds it convenient to visit Mitsu's estate.)

h3. Non-criminal bounties targeting political adversaries

In the previous example, a samurai committed assault and fled the jurisdiction rather than face an magistrate's inquest.  However, bounties may also be placed for persons of interest in an open inquiry, e.g. for witnesses to a crime of which they have no suspected culpability.  Consider the following:

Hida no Akito Zenshiro is visiting Kyuden Kakita to negotiate tariff rates between the the Kakita family and the northern territories of the Crab clan.  While a new agreement is eventually struck, in the course of negotiations he makes several derisive comments about the "unseemly greed" of the Crane.  While none of these were made in the presence of his hosts, he was overheard saying such things on multiple occasions by various people around Kyuden Kakita.

A few months after Zenshiro returns home, a local courtier name Kakita Torikago calls upon his friend, Seppun Shogo, the Imperial magistrate for Kakita lands.  Torikago explains that there was a troubling incident at a local tea house, the Evening's Sigh, which culminated in a large brawl.  The matter has been mostly dealt with, but two of the participants still have conflicting recollections about who said what in the hours leading up to the incident.

Hida Zenshiro was not present for the brawl, but multiple witnesses attest to seeing him there that evening, having left less than an hour prior to the altercation.  Torikago explains that Kakita Hideo, the Kakita Deputy Minister of Justice, has already written to Zenshiro, requesting that he return to the city as an honored guest of the Kakita to help clear up this matter.  However, Zenshiro's reply letter states that he has never been to the Evening's Sigh, and was not present that evening, and therefore he has declined the invitation to return.

Torikago explains that the Kakita Ministry of Justice is deeply troubled by this matter.  Either a witness to these events is falsifying statements to avoid an awkward interview, or someone has impersonated a traveling Crab samurai and the impersonator may still be at large.  Either way, Torikago requests that Shogo send an Imperial summons, compelling Zenshiro to return to Kyuden Kakita to help resolve this matter.

Because of the awkwardness involved in forcing the hand of the younger brother of the Akito house's Minister of Revenue, Torikago offers a **compensatory gift** (given that Shogo is of the twelfth rank, this is a gift of 12 koku).

After several more months, Hida Zenshiro has not yet appeared nor offered a reply.  The local Imperial magistrate for Shiro Akito, Seppun Miharu, has passed along the summons to Zenshiro's brother, the Akito Minister of Revenue, and Miharu's yoriki have repeatedly called upon the family estate, but each time been told that Torikago is away and that the date of his return is unknown.

Once again, Kakita Torikago calls upon his dear friend Seppun Shogo about this matter.  He expresses once again the conviction with which the Kakita Ministry of Justice takes its responsibilities, and reluctantly requests that Shogo place a bounty on whoever delivers Hida Zenshiro to Kyuden Kakita to finally settle this matter.  Given the seriousness of the matter, Torikago suggests that a 50 koku bounty would be appropriate.

However, while this bounty pertains to an Imperial summons and therefore it would be Shogo placing the bounty, Torikago understands that this request is in service of Kakita family duties, and therefore he offers to fully fund the bounty himself (in the form of a 50 koku **indemnity gift** once the bounty is paid) to avoid placing an undue burden on the office of the Imperial magistrate.  And while there is no 10% fee on bounties placed by Imperial magistrates, Torikago also offers another 12-koku compensatory gift, in recognition of the trouble to which he is putting his friend by making this request.

Prior to the creation of the Wasp clan, it is unlikely that a bounty such as this would have ever been collected.  Samurai from the major clans would have avoided stepping into such a political minefield for what, to most of the noble houses, is a trifling sum.  However, this is NOT a trivial amount of money for a Wasp samurai, and so it's possible that some enterprising Wasp bounty hunter may choose to confront Hida Zenshiro to enforce the Imperial summons.

This confrontation, if it does happen, may be dangerous for both parties.  Zenshiro and his Hida relatives would surely never interfere with a duly authorized agent of the Emperor's justice, but if the Wasp bounty hunter forgets his place, he may find himself killed by the Hida, who will be all too happy to explain that the upstart Wasp samurai offered a personal insult which resulted in a quarrel which led to his death - assuming that there are sufficient local witnesses to require an explanation be offered at all!

Zenshiro may additionally argue that this is clearly a manipulated summons, and that any Wasp bounty hunter enforcing it would be tarnishing the Emperor's justice and the good standing of their clan by allowing themselves to be used to harass the political enemies of the Crane.  That said, as agents of the Emperor's justice, some Wasp samurai may consider it disloyal to turn aside in the pursuit of an officially sanctioned bounty for such reasons.

And of course, if Zenshiro declines to agree to return to Kyuden Kakita, it's entirely possible that he himself might be killed while refusing to surrender himself into the authority of the Wasp bounty hunter who confronts him!  This would surely be a shame, including for the poor Kakita family, whose mystery of the events leading up to their unfortunate teahouse brawl would sadly go forever unsolved.

h3. Most common bounties

While every case is unique, there are categories of bounties which represent the vast majority of fugitives which appear in the Imperial bulletins:

* **A samurai who has declined a proper challenge to a duel, or fled to avoid being presented with one.**  The most serious disputes between samurai are handled via duels, sometimes duels to submission (in which either party may forfeit after blood has been drawn) or duels to the death.  In both cases, a samurai who has offended another while away from home will sometimes return to the safety of their own lands to avoid being forced to answer for the alleged insult.  The going rate for such bounties is the yearly stipend of the highest ranking samurai involved (i.e. whichever of the challenger and the challenged is higher ranking).

* **A local peasant criminal flees their home as the authorities are closing in on them.**  Such cases normally do not result in a bounty being placed, though sometimes a county magistrate or provincial governor or minister of justice will take personal umbrage at the thought of such a criminal escaping, and will register a sizeable bounty on the head of such criminals (usually 5-10 koku).

* **A disgraced and cowardly samurai abandons their family to flee justice.**  Samurai commit crimes as well, and sometimes the shame of facing public judgment is too much to bear.  Sometimes they become ronin and live in exile.  Other times they assume a false identity, either one invented from whole cloth or stolen from a family member who has already passed (and who therefore is likely to have letters of introduction and perhaps even travel papers in their name).  Even if the fugitive's family would prefer to let their dishonorable scion be forgotten (and may literally strike them from the family records), their enemies might pay to register a sizeable bounty in such cases (usually 10 koku per rank of the fugitive, e.g. 30 koku for a samurai of the third rank).

* **A samurai avoiding a legal inquiry out of shame.**  The cases of Shinjo Yoshi and Hida no Akito Zenshiro are both examples of this.  Sometimes a samurai is hiding amongst their family because they are guilty of a crime.  Other times they have witnessed something which they would rather not be involved in and have declined to answer a legal summons to testify (whether to avoid embarrassment or protect a friend or simply avoid a troublesome joiurney).  In some cases they may be targeted for harrassment by their political enemies; the Crane clan have shown increasingly willingness to use their great wealth in this way.  The amounts of these bounties based on the seriousness of the matter rather than the ranks of those involved (except insofar as higher-ranking people are likely to command larger bounties).

h3. Questionable bounty collection

The above example of Hida no Akito Zenshiro is an instructive one, because it is plausibly a case of someone responding to an insult by spending money to use the Imperial Ministry of Justice to harrass someone.  In addition to having to deal with the hassle of dodging an Imperial summons, if a Wasp bounty hunter does confront Zenshiro, then he may be subjected to the indignity of being forced to travel over 500 miles (and then the same distance on the return trip) only to find that the sightings of him on the night in question are quickly dismissed as a case of "mistaken identity".

This is far from the most questionable type of bounty collection which might tempt an overeager Wasp samurai.  Even before the founding of the Wasp clan, unscrupulous bounty hunters have been been accused of conducting targeted assassinations and other acts which amount to murder for profit.  Some examples:

* A bounty hunter will typically not even meet the person who placed the bounty, often not even after it has been remitted.  However, in some cases, a samurai who places a bounty might meet with a specific bounty hunter and provide generous gifts, explaining how dangerous their task is, and warning them that their target will certainly resist and need to be slain.  They may even promise that in the event of that occurring, there will be additional gifts given in appreciation for the danger that was braved in carrying out the Emperor's justice.

* At any given time, there are dozens or hundreds of outstanding bounties for bandit fugitives.  This means that when encountering ANY small group of traveling peasants, at least 1 of them is likely to match the physical description of one or more fugitives on the current bulletin of uncollected bounties.  A bounty hunter willing to profane the Emperor's justice might attack the group, place the head of the closest match in a bag filled with salt (to preserve it), and deliver it in fulfillment of the bounty, collecting the reward for having captured a wanted bandit, who "confessed to their crimes as he lay dying".
** Depending on the circumstances, an unscrupulous local magistrate might be happy to pay this bounty without caring whether the true criminal was slain.  After all, the magistrate can now brag that no one escapes their wrath after committing a crime in their jurisdiction, even after fleeing to distant lands.  While no samurai of honor would ever stoop to such duplicity, even an honest magistrate might not think to interrogate such a matter too closely, or question the authenticity of an already-difficult-to-identify severed head preserved in salt.

* One reason to obtain Imperial travel papers (or letters of introduction from prestigious officials) is to unambiguously identify yourself while far from home.  It used to be distressingly common for unscrupulous local officials to shake down travelers who lacked such identification.  Now that Wasp bounty hunters are increasingly checking for criminals along the Empire's roads and waystations, they will certainly face the same temptations to accept a gifts of consideration in lieu of formal identification from "suspicious" travelers.





Note the order in which I've presented all of this information.  We spent considerable time talking about the realities of Rokugan's geography, culture, caste system, government, and organization before we discussed anything supernatural.  And when we finally did get to the supernatural, much of it is ambiguous and difficult to understand or explain.  This reflects the "low-fantasy" nature of the setting.  The supernatural is very real, and "everyone knows" that "foxes are always kidnapping children and replacing them" and "everyone" knows someone who has seen a ghost, but it's unclear (and deliberately undefined!) how often any of these things are true!

