Eight centuries ago, there was a tsukai who lived in the forest east of the Shrine of Perfect Contentment, in what is now the Takaba falconry preserve. Masayoshi (the monk who is the Bearer of the Golden Seal of Amaterasu) suspects that Takaba was this tsukai’s name, because this was the name of the forest before it became a preserve for falcons, and the origin of that name has been lost while most other names from the region can be found in the Daidoji histories.

Takaba lived centuries before Hantei Iuchiban became the first bloodspeaker, and thus he had no way to conceal the Shadowlands taint that his witchcraft brought into his body. However, the Emperor’s subjects were less vigorous in prosecuting tsukai in those days, so Takaba was able to practice his craft in the solitude of the forest. He was sometimes sought out by peasants and samurai alike who desired his aid.

One day he found that his obsidian knife had disappeared. He performed dark divinations to discern its whereabouts, and tracked it to a nearby village, where it was hidden in the barn of a farmer. The farmer denied having stolen the knife, and Takaba believed the denial, confident that such a man wouldn’t dare steal from him.

When Takaba returned to his forest cottage, he found that his silver chalice was missing, despite the wards and underworld guards he had set upon his home. He immediate worked to strengthen the wards and summon additional dark entities to watch over his house. However, when he returned from finding his chalice in another barn of another farmer, his obsidian knife had again been stolen.

Takaba set about studying the ways of wards and traps, experimenting with different principles and practices to fortify the protections he had set. Still, every time he left to recover a stolen object, he would find another possession missing.

This continued for years, as Takaba drove himself to master the art of warding. One day he returned and found that one of his magical snares had succeeded in catching the fox which had been burgling his home. However, even after years of offenses, Takaba could not hate the fox, who had only been acting according to her playful and mischievous nature. She offered him “a fox’s promise” that that if he let her go, she would never trouble him again.

Takaba knew what a fox’s promise was worth, but he still set her free, unable to bring himself to harm her.

The fox continued to burgle Takaba, and he continued to try to thwart her. In their battle of wits, Takaba would sometimes succeed in trapping the fox, and she would sometimes succeed in stealing his implements only to abandon them elsewhere for him to recover. As their contest continued, the two of them reached new pinnacles of mastery of their crafts. Takaba became the greatest practitioner of wards and bindings that has ever lived, and the fox became the most accomplished of any of her kind in the ways of stealth and shapechanging. Takaba would ward his cottage such that naught but air and light could enter or leave, and the fox would change herself into a gentle breeze carried upon the moonlight. Takaba would forge an unbreakable snare which would bind a leg and prevent the leg from changing into anything else, and the fox would shift into a five-legged creature and chew off her now-extra leg to escape unharmed.

As this continued over the years, the two of them fell in love, and had many children together. Some of their human descendants continue practicing maho witchcraft in the Daidoji domain to this day, while their fox descendants continue to play tricks on farmers and travelers in the Daidoji countryside.

One day Takaba had a brilliant insight – even not knowing the true name of his fox-wife, he could nevertheless construct a ward that would bind any intruder, not by their physical form, but by pinning their name itself. And so his fox-wife was trapped, and unlike all of Takaba’s other successes, which she was able to eventually outwit, this one seemed insurmountable. Takaba’s ward seemed to be based on principles which were unchallengeable in their power over that which was bound.

Eventually the fox had an idea of her own. She stole into her husband’s cottage, and after being pinned by her own name, she chewed her name off from her very self. Such a thing should not be possible – even people who give their names to bloodspeakers are still connected to that name, and this connection remains even after death. A thing without a name literally cannot exist in this realm, which is why oni require names in order to be summoned.

Still, while all known principle and doctrine declare this impossible, the fox succeeded. But having overcome the final ward which could ever trouble her, she was now without a name, and so she began to fade away, becoming less and less herself. No longer truly a fox, she was becoming something else. As this happened, her hunger increased, and she found herself consuming the very essences of the foods she sought to eat.

Eventually Takaba realized that it was names that his wife hungered for, so he began to feed her the unused names he had taken as payment for the years of his practice. But the small names of peasants proved insufficient to satiate his wife’s savage hunger, so he fed her larger and larger names. As he did so he turned his research towards how to bind one of these names to her permanently, in order to replace her true name which had been lost. He swore by all his power that she would be restored and that her suffering as the Nameless One would cease.

In the course of his research, Takaba tried to record the names he had fed to his wife to understand what satisfied the most, and how big a name had to be in order to temporarily sate her hunger. He quickly found that he could no longer remember any name once it was fed to her, and any written record of that name quickly became blurred and illegible. Further inquiry revealed that living people whose names were eaten in this way were themselves forgotten, even by their closest family. By consuming their names, Takaba’s fox-wife had severed their connection to the world, dropping their souls into the underworld without even the memories of that life, forgotten by the world itself.

Takaba eventually devised a ritual that he believed would restore her to her previous form, but it would require a name larger than any he possessed, including his own. He set about to use the last of his resources to ambush Yasuki Kiringu, the daimyo of the Yasuki family, which was still part of the Crane clan at that time, as he returned from a trip to Kyuden Daidoji.

With Kiringu’s name eaten, the world continued with his brother Yasuki Tsanumi as the Yasuki daimyo. Indeed, the world continued as if Tsanumi himself had always been the daimyo, with no one remembering that Kiringu had ever been born. Tsanumi was much angrier at the Crane clan for their lack of support than his brother had been – Kiringu had taken the ruling on heretical farming practices in stride and valued long-term stability more than responding to loss and insult. However, with Tsanumi as daimyo, the Yasuki seceded from the Crane clan and joined the Crab clan, to the shock of the whole Empire.

The Emperor’s most talented advisors and soothsayers were caught off guard. Not only had his political advisors been confident that the Yasuki would avoid such drastic action, even the Emperor’s prophets had been unable to see this coming. Apparently the changes to the world caused by the feasts of the Nameless One stand above prophecy itself, affecting the world’s futures in ways even they cannot perceive. The Hantei immediately dispatched members of the Order of Amaterasu to investigate how such a thing could have happened.

Takaba meanwhile was able to perform his final ritual, sacrificing his own life and name to bind his soul to the soul of his wife, uniting the two of them into a single being. This ritual was powered by the name of the Yasuki daimyo, and for a time it seemed that it had succeeded. The fox was once again able to walk through the Takaba forest, even as the world forgot her husband for whom it was named, and she began to remember that she was a fox. However, while this ritual had done more than any names fed to her, it too faded over time and her hunger eventually began to return.

It is unknown how she was trapped by the Emperor’s agents. A prison for the Nameless One was built in the Forgotten Tomb, but no one knows who could have constructed such a thing. Her prison could hold only a soul with no connections to any names, and the principles by which that is even possible were only later discovered by the Emperor's wisest smiths by examining the construction of this special prison. It seems clear that whoever succeeded in imprisoning her was eaten in the process, possibly having sacrificed themselves to ensure the success of their endeavor. Their sacrifice is commemorated in secret by the Order of Amaterasu, though the name or names of whoever is responsible can never be known.

Several years ago, Moto Tsume led an attack on the Forgotten Tomb, attempting to enter it through its entrance in Yomi, the realm of the honored dead. He failed, retreating with his forces in tatters, the honored ancestors who guard the tomb emerging victorious. However, his spiritual assault sent dark energies of death into the Forgotten Tomb, rocking its foundations, and weakening the prison for the Nameless One enough for her to escape.

She first ate a legionnaire at Beiden Pass, who was tracked by Kitsuki Fu. She ate a few others as she regained her strength, eventually making her way home to the Takaba falconry preserve, where she ate the County Magistrate of Kanto in the province of Akishi. Daidoji Maku subsequently replaced him, with no one having any memory of his predecessor.

As a servant of Yozo, the fortune of legal justice, Masayoshi has tracked her this far, learning much of the story of how she came to exist from her descendants among the foxes and bloodspeakers of the Daidoji domain. He has struck a bargain with them to work together for the common purpose of finally putting their ancestor to rest. The bloodspeakers provided a powerful artifact of great name to act as bait, while the foxes set to work searching for the telltale signs of a life had fallen out of the world to locate someone those close to someone she had replaced.

The PCs were the only people found who perfectly fit the criteria of people most suitable for battling the Nameless One. They were lightly connected to the previous county magistrate of Kanto, having served him for only a few months before he was eaten. They later became close friends with Maku. That combination of being connected with weak-but-still-present ties to someone eaten and strong ties to someone who “replaced” that person was ideal for warding them against being eaten themselves, though the danger would still be great.

Masayoshi set wards and traps around a totem of great name provided by the bloodspeakers of the Daidoji domain. He knew his wards and traps could only delay rather than ensnare the Nameless One, who laughed at traps even in the days when she was merely a clever fox. But they would stall her long enough for the PCs to confront her and cleave away the names she had eaten, allowing her soul to finally descend into the underworld and continue on its journey through the cycle of death and rebirth.

Everything I just wrote was the setup to a supernatural adventure which I was happy with.







I've repeatedly made reference to the Forgotten Tomb, which is something I come back to periodically.  This is a general category of place which I refer to as one of the "between places", i.e. places which are coexistent between two different realms.

Here's another introduction that I wrote for a different adventure, in which the PCs journeyed deep into a cave to meet with a gaijin shaman-woman who they believed had wisdom to share with them:

The morning light fades quickly behind you, being already mainly blocked by the Twilight Mountains.
As you walk deeper into the cave, the light from your lanterns begins to spread out in front of you.
Normally a lantern radiates light, illumating closer things more brightly than distant surfaces.
But you walk into the tunnel, you find that very little light is cast behind you, and the light
in front of you is so dissipated that it creates the effect of an ambient glow, illuminating the
passage evenly.  You quickly find that you can see the turn in the tunnel 20 feet ahead of you as
clearly as the hand in front of your face, though the same does not apply to the path behind you,
into which the light quickly scatters and disperses into the darkness.

As you go deeper, you find that the smoke from your lantern also intensifies, but without the
lantern itself flaring as it would if it encountered marsh fumes or mine gases.  Instead, the smoke
rolls out in waves onto the floor ahead of you, being carried faster and more intensely than the
slight breeze at your backs can account for.

Eventually you come to a dip in the passage, where most of the tunnel is submerged in water.  The
water is quite cold, and ordinarily you might prefer to avoid it as much as possible, to avoid
frostbite or worse.  But the smoke from your lantern seems to have multiplied, possibly joining
some existing smoke hovering above the water.  Indeed, the smell of the smoke has shifted, the
oily smoke of your lantern mixing with the smoke from some other fires which must be burning
ahead.  As people familiar with mines as "silver miners", you feel confident that the vapors
you're encountering are not the "damps" of mine gases, and in fact the smoke seems unnatural.

You are entering one of the "between places".  People have sometimes gotten lost in the Shinomen Forest only a hundred miles from the Gateway to the Land of the Burning Sands and exited the Isawa Woodlands in Phoenix lands.  The Shifting Islands around the Mantis Isles are another example, where chidren playing have fallen asleep and woken up off the coast of Otosan Uchi.  Depending on the makeup of this place, you might find an exit out into the Ivory Kingdom.  Though of course, the most dangerous type of "between places" are the ones which are coexistent between different realms.  The Forgotten Tomb simultaneously exists in the mortal world and in Yomi, the realm
of the honored dead.  Regardless of what type of place you are in, this may be your last chance to turn back.

The above was the introduction to the place where the PCs had to enter (unless they decided to abandon their quest entirely).  







As an example of something where there is more legitimate debate, consider the existence of the Burning Sands Desert.  The following is also drawn from some of my notes from a previous campaign:

The Burning Sands desert begins at the edge of Moto lands, which are themselves about 400 miles wide. Medin al Salaat is approximately 400 miles deep into the desert. The desert extends along the entire Western side of the Twilight Mountains, and then further south, where it makes up the western border of the Shadowlands all the way down to the edge of the Ivory Kingdom, and is thus at least 1500 miles “tall”.

It’s unclear why such a large area is made up entirely of desert – this is said by traders on the Ki Rin Trail to be the largest desert in the world. The desert has fewer elemental kami than one might expect – there aren’t many fire kami despite the great heat, and the earth kami are either small and scattered or large and slumbering. Denizens of Medin al Salaat describe the desert as “inhabited neither by men nor jinn”.

It is widely agreed, both in Rokugan and even among gaijin, that Lady Sun is responsible for the state of the desert, though people disagree on why and how this came to happen. The following sections summarize several differing accounts of how the Burning Sands desert was created by Lady Sun.

GAIJIN FABLES:
According to stories passed down through the Hidden Way, the Burning Sands desert is said by gaijin to have once been a lush and fertile land. The region was cursed by Lady Sun, though different groups in Medin al Salaat have different explanations as to why.

According to the Ashalan, Lady Sun was once imprisoned there by the forces of the underworld, who wished the world to be plunged into eternal darkness. A fearsome oni was left to guard the entrance to her prison. A man named Ali crept into the entrance of the cave and distracted the oni with a golden mirror, allowing him to slay it with a crysteel knife.  When Lady Sun was freed, her fire burned away the land which had served as her prison as she returned to the heavens.

According to the Almekhem, the King of Jinn invaded the night sky with his armies, put out most of the stars in the heavens, and caused Lord Moon to fall into a deep slumber. He then imprisoned Lady Sun in a prison made of his own awful face. After the war between men and jinn, the power of jinn was sealed by invoking the power of Lady Sun, and this seal burned away the water of the ocean and greenery of the land which lay where the Burning Sands desert now lies.

BLESSINGS AND CURSES
There are a number of stories how and why the desert was scorched. Shosuro, the priestess queen who swore fealty to Bayushi during the founding of the Scorpion clan, explained that the gods appear to humans from behind masks. Rivers and oceans are merely the masks worn by the water kami, just as ground and mountains are the masks of the earth kami. What we see in the sky during the daytime is only the mask worn by Lady Sun, whose true form we cannot comprehend. The desert is what remains in the aftermath of Lady Sun briefly removing her mask, casting her true gaze upon part of the moral world for only an instant.

The Togashi monks have no one canonical story of how the desert came to exist, but they question the assumption that the desert represents Lady Sun’s anger or displeasure. The desert seems to command more of Lady Sun’s attention than other places, this is true. Yet does that not imply that this land has her favor? The attention of divine beings can be terrifying, but if Lady Sun’s blessing appears to be some form of curse, then does that not simply raise questions about how we understand blessings and curses and whether there is even any difference between them?

LADY SUN'S APOLOGY

"This book is a hoax, planted in libraries around the Empire by Isawa Akuma in the 5th century. Although its contents are fraudulent, it is believed to be adapted from other works whose authorship is unknown, and therefore it has not been banned by the Imperial Ministry of Rites. Anyone who discovers a copy of this book without this disclaimer is ordered to report it to the office of the Jade Champion."  (The quoted paragraph is the legally mandated disclaimer which appears at the beginning of every legitimate copy of the book Lady Sun's Apology.)

In the late 5th century, copies of a strange book called “Lady Sun’s Apology” appeared in libraries around the Empire. Each copy appeared to be centuries old, and many of them seemed to have been in those libraries for quite some time. Most copies were only uncovered after news began to spread and librarians began to scour their collections to see whether they too happened to possess a copy. The book was eventually found to be a hoax created by Isawa Akuma, and therefore the above disclaimer comes at the beginning of every modern copy.

The book contains an alternate (false) history of the Shadowlands invasion a millenium ago. The lands to the west were inhabited by a civilization of nonhuman creatures whose name no longer exists. Because the name of this nonhuman race has been lost, the book refers to them only as The Race. The Race had the ability to consume and purify the Shadowlands taint – not in the way that goblins feed on it, but by actually expelling it from the world. This gave humanity the chance to defeat the Shadowlands – rather than simply stopping it from spreading, there was the chance of actual victory.

When the Shadowlands invaded, humanity allied with The Race to defeat Fu Leng’s armies. This book details how the armies of the Race fell against the Shadowlands, suffering worse defeats than any human army. After the Shinsei revealed the Prophecy of the Age of Man and left with the Seven Thunders, leaders of The Race feared what humans would do after the war ended. And so, with humans having already put their plan to win the war into action, their ambassadors to the humans assassinated Hantei and burned Otosan Uchi to the ground.

In retribution for the murder of her favorite child, Lady Sun invoked the Accords of Creation and revoked the existence of The Race, declaring that now and throughout all of the eternity, the world shall exist as if their species had never been created, all of their consequences removed from the flow of time. And so it came to pass that Hantei was never killed, Otosan Uchi was never burned, and humanity’s war against the Shadowlands was never truly winnable.

Lady Sun’s Apology is so titled because it concludes with an apology from Lady Sun to humanity, given by the High Priest of Amaterasu, who is listed as the author of this book. Lady Sun explains that humanity’s struggles will be far worse than if she had allowed these events to happen. She has written this book through her high priest so that humans will understand that their endless struggles against the Shadowlands come from a mother’s love. She implores the reader to understand that no mother could have stood by and allowed her son to be murdered, not when she had the power to prevent it. Because of a mother’s love, the Burning Sands desert now lies forever empty, devoid of the hope for an end to the Shadowlands it could have contained.

Although this book is a hoax, it’s an extremely puzzling one for a number of reasons. It references things such as the “Accords of Creation” which have never appeared in any other historical account, along with the title “High Priest of Amaterasu”, which was not known outside the Emperor’s inner circle of advisors at the time the book was released. The general thinking is that Isawa Akuma cobbled together a book from existing sources taken from his Great Library (the Oni no Akuma which created the library and which is the library), since the library contains “many of the books which never were written”. Such books are useful for hoaxes, since they won’t be traceable to other sources, but they are usually quite strange and unworldly.

As for Akuma’s motives in publishing the hoax, the commonly accepted conclusion is that Akuma wanted to spread the idea that the Shadowlands taint is not inherently evil, and that Heaven originally planned for humanity to overcome it. Indeed, the book makes reference to members of The Race cleaning up after rituals performed by tsukai, to prevent the Shadowlands taint from upsetting the kami. This implies that tsukai were originally intended by heaven to be capable of practicing maho without upsetting the kami, which seems like the kind of thing an oni-summoning tsukai shugenja such as Akuma would want people to believe.







The fortune of death is an important deity to understand in this setting because I think she reveals some interesting facets of the fortunes.

Emma-O is the fortune of death, recognized throughout the Empire since the dawn of civilization. However, there is no Grand Abbot of Emma-O, and temples to Emma-O are all in remote locations to avoid attracting the her attention in populated areas. The order of Emma-O is known as the Order of the Peaceful Repose, and specializes in pacifying upset ghosts and helping them return to Jigoku. There is at least one monastery to Emma-O in every clan, as the services of the Order of the Peaceful Repose will inevitably be required in every clan at some point.

A few well-established truths which are important to remember about the fortunes:

→ No fortune is evil, though many of them are terrifying. Death is a part of the natural order, and Emma-O is therefore an important part of the interconnectedness of all things.

→ No two fortunes are ever in opposition to one another. This can be counterintuitive, since e.g. there is a fortune of mercy (Fukurokujin) and a fortune of personal vengeance (Hofukushu). It is therefore an important teaching that if you ever find yourself understanding two fortunes in opposition to each other, then you do not understand either of them. Therefore, while Emma-O is the fortune of death, she cannot be said to exist in opposition to Jurojin, the fortune of longevity.

→ Emma-O therefore doesn’t rejoice in any specific death more than any other. An uneducated peasant might wrongly guess that Emma-O would delight in someone who dies young and prefer that people lead short lives to long lives. This is clearly not the case – if it was then there could be no fortune of longevity!  An interesting corollary is that Jurojin, the fortune of longevity, does not always prefer long lives to short ones – this is counterintuitive but still a well-established truth.

→ Emma-O is a fortune, and fortunes are part of the fabric of reality. Emma-O is not merely a god who happens to favor the concept of death, she literally is death.  To be more precise, she exists as the cycles and connection created by death which further shape and create death in turn.

Note that while some historical polytheistic religions have a concept of gods who are basically just humans with superpowers, I don't want that at all for my fictional setting of Rokugan.  The idea that the fortunes are part of the fabric of reality is a core part of the theology of my worldbuilding.

In my version of Rokugan, one question which arises is why the fortunes do not give clearer direction to humanity.  Kitsu Okura wrote the book "On the Relationship between Man and the Fortunes" 300 years ago, which sought to tackle this question.  He identifies what he calls "the six doctrines" which attempt to explain this mystery.

Here is the introduction to that book, which I wrote as a "primary source document" for my players to read.  Hopefully this will help explain these concepts as well for the purpose of generating vows:

We seek to know the will of the fortunes, to follow their guidance, to gain their favor, and to teach our children to do the same.  Few accomplish any part of this undertaking, for the ways of the fortunes are inscrutable.  Even those lucky and unlucky few whom the fortunes contact directly seldom comprehend the messages they’ve received.

Why should this be?  Why do the fortunes not communicate their desires more clearly?  When their instructions are misunderstood, their wishes often go unfulfilled.

I have traveled the world, combed through every library of note, and interviewed every living authority with wisdom to offer, from Isawa no Naka Kuro to Togashi Hoshi to the Council of Elemental Masters to the Qabal of the Sahir.  All collected wisdom on this topic divides roughly into six major doctrines, which I shall articulate herein.  All of them are wrong, and I shall explain in this treatise the particular failures of each to explain the immense complexity of the ways of the fortunes.  Yet each doctrine contains a glimpse of the truth, so by comprehending each well enough to studiously reject it, we bring ourselves closer to true understanding.

What follows is a brief summary of the six doctrines, each corresponding to the lengthier section of my treatise in which I expound and catalog their merits and flaws.

1) Just as we cannot truly comprehend the will and nature of the fortunes, they struggle to understand our limited minds.  Being so vast in their existence, the fortunes speak to us as we might attempt to communicate with worms.  The more attention and effort is brought to bear, the more danger the worm may be crushed by the weight of the superior being.

2) The fortunes push against one another with their very existence.  Consider the forces which direct human behavior.  Fear, desire, regret.  Loyalty, compassion, courage.  Love, hate, joy.  When we break our normal routine to attempt some great endeavor, it means those forces within ourselves are out of proportion and an overflowing of some emotion spurs us to action.  So too with the fortunes, who collectively maintain the balance of the world itself.  When a fortune commands mortals to act, their instructions are muddied by the thousand other fortunes pulling with a thousand other directions.

3) Our struggle to better understand their instructions is what the fortunes truly desire.  When the teacher sends his pupil on a pilgrimage, it is often the journey and not the destination which matters.  Likewise, after completing some great enterprise on behalf of the fortunes, we must consider whether the task itself was their goal, or the result it produced within us as we struggled to obey them.

4) The fortunes desire only the greatest and most dedicated followers to be rewarded with their blessings.  Why should they squander power and effort on those who will fail to act without clear instructions?  By giving enigmatic directions, only their shrewdest and most resourceful disciples will succeed and prove worthy of being imbued with their power.

5) Communicating their will unambiguously carries a high price, which is rarely worth paying.  Lesser spirits are easily understood by humans, but the fortunes must reduce themselves to such an inferior existence for a time when they choose to communicate clearly.  Why should they bear that burden when their mortal servants are already given sufficient direction to discern their will?

6) The fortunes are vast in their existence, but humans are deep in our nature.  We are composed of many disparate parts, and a single fortune is the avatar of only a single piece of our composition.  While that existence has a weight far beyond mortal man, in a sense it is we who are the giants, for we are constructions of all the fortunes combined.  The fortunes are clear to any who listen, but we so rarely pay our attention to whatever small part of ourselves speaks their will that we wrongly call the fortunes unfathomable.

Note that all of the above continues the running theme of the fortunes as cycle/connection entities which make up the fabric of reality.  Moreover, these doctrines highlight the dynamic nature of the relationship between the fortunes and humans. Whether it's the struggle to understand their instructions, the selective rewarding of their most dedicated followers, or the transformative impact of undertaking tasks on their behalf, these doctrines suggest that the relationship with the fortunes is not just about receiving clear, direct guidance, but also about personal growth, self-discovery, and connection with the deeper truths of existence.

This makes the concept of swearing a vow to a fortune all the more significant, as it's not just a promise to an individual deity, but a commitment to engage with a fundamental aspect of reality and existence. This commitment is not just about following a set of rules or achieving specific outcomes, but also about embracing the challenge, uncertainty, and transformation inherent in the process.







Here's some extra information about the names of fortunes in my setting, in case it matters.

Many stories about fortunes involve a human becoming a fortune after their death.  This can be confusing because the aspect the fortunes represent always predate the death of that human.  So when we talk about a human becoming a fortune, this generally means one of two things.

In most cases of a human becoming a fortune, the person was so in tune with a particular fortune that upon their death their soul does not descend into Jigoku (the underworld) but instead becomes one with the fortune.  The Emperor will then officially recognize this, and thereafter anyone referring to that fortune will have a name that can be used to identify and connect to that fortune in their religious practices.

In other cases, the Emperor may use his divine power to elevate a person’s soul, causing them to become one with a fortune after their death.  This helps someone who is deemed worthy but whose life was too short to have reached this point on their own.  This helps both the person and all of humanity by providing the world with a name to which they can direct their prayers and offerings.

In both situations, the fortune existed prior to the death of the human and being given a human name.  Many fortunes went by multiple other names in the days before the Great Ancestors brought civilization to humanity.  Although it is not heretical to refer to fortunes by other names, it’s considered uncultured and demonstrates ignorance of proper doctrine.

This is my way as the GM of resolving all of the stories of people "becoming" a fortune upon their death.  when a human "becomes" a fortune, it's more about the human's soul merging with, or becoming aligned with, a pre-existing facet of reality represented by the fortune. The individual doesn't create a new fortune, but rather becomes part of an existing one, which reflects their deep connection with the principle or aspect of life that the fortune embodies. The naming of fortunes, whether through recognition by the Emperor or association with a particular human, is a way for people to more easily understand, relate to, and connect with these complex and profound forces.

In other cases a fortune has been identified by name without using a name which once belonged to a human.  For example, Bishamon, the Fortune of Strength, has always been known as Bishamon, rather than being named for any specific, identifiable human with that name.







I mentioned "Doji Shizue and the Secrets of Calligraphy" before, and in Rokugan there is a play with that title.  In the play Shizue has sought out the advice of the Kitsu Okura.  The family line of Kitsu Okura denounces this scene, which is the only scene in which Kitsu Okura appears, though his descendents have declined to say which specific part is not accurate to fails to reflect their family understanding of the fortunes.

Here is the scene, which I wrote as an in-universe example of how some people talk about the fortunes:

Act 2, Scene 2

Okura:  Suppose that you were touched by the Fortune of obedience, whom I shall not name here.  Consider for a moment what would follow.

Shizue (frowning):  Is there such a Fortune?  I have not encountered such in my studies, not in any library in the Empire.

Okura:  Pfaw!  I spoke the word ‘obedience’ and you felt my meaning.  Are you foolish enough to doubt the existence of its Fortune simply because lesser scholars have failed to learn his name?

Shizue:  Apologies.  What effect would result from being touched by the great Fortune of obedience?

Okura (sharply):  Did you not tell me you’d studied such things?

Shizue:  Yes of course.  I imagine… my loyalty to my lord would increase, while my subordinates’ loyalty to me would likewise increase.

Okura:  Ha!  You assume a human sensibility from a divine being.  Obedience is not loyalty, and it is loyalty rather than obedience which Akodo identifies as a virtue of bushido.  And your Fortune would care nothing for any virtue, only that you obey your orders without thought, question, or hesitation.

Shizue:  I see.  I would need to cleave my own judgement apart from my loyalty, leaving merely dumb obedience.  Only then would my service to the fortune be rewarded.

Okura:  And what do you imagine your reward would be?

Shizue:  Good luck and prosperity, especially in the sphere of the fortune’s influence.  My lord would know I would never betray him - could never betray him - and would grant me authority over many households.  Those under me would find themselves possessed of a share of the same obedience I cultivate in myself.

Okura (amused):  You are not… entirely wrong.  Yet you underestimate the cost of your service, as well as its rewards.  Tell me, if your obedience increased beyond normal human capacity, what pieces of yourself do you imagine would likewise decrease?

Shizue:  Certainly all forms of treachery… but that would not be enough.  By choosing dumb obedience, I would sacrifice away my capacity to pass judgement and decide right from wrong.  Taken far enough, I may lose even the ability to comprehend what outcomes my actions may have, since all that would matter to me is that I obey my lord.

Okura:  Indeed.  You would find yourself with the contentment of the Enlightened, blissfully instrumenting your daimyo’s will.  Yet you might also struggle to remember, as you looked at the faces of your children, what it means when they smile or frown.

Shizue:  Oh my.  Can any balance be struck?

Okura (derisively):  With the Fortune of obedience?

Shizue:  Oh.  I suppose not.  If my daimyo wished otherwise, I might be unable to choose balance over extremity.  Given time, I might be unable to even comprehend the concept.  But surely this is not the case with every Fortune!

Okura:  Are you a gambler?  If you find such consequences unacceptable, would you still choose this path on the wager that you escape them?

Shizue:  … for the sake of my family I would sacrifice anything.  Even my humanity, though I pray this shall not be required of me.

Okura:  Then answer me this: what separates the Seven Fortunes of Good Luck from the remainder of the Thousand Fortunes?

Shizue (confused):  They are the Great Fortunes, and the remainder are the Lesser Fortunes.

Okura (forcefully):  Wrong!  There is no Greater or Lesser, any more than a chain has a greater or lesser link.

Shizue:  Why then are the Seven elevated above the rest?

Okura:  An intelligent question!  Hard enough to comprehend why it should be asked, and harder still to answer.  Name the aspects of the Seven Fortunes.

Shizue:  Romantic Love.  Strength.  Contentment.  Wealth.  Longevity.  Honest Work.  Mercy.

Okura:  A strange assortment of things.

Shizue:  I’d never considered… how were these Seven selected?

Okura:  As you know, by the Hantei in consultation with the Shinsei through wisdom far beyond either of us.  But you ask the wrong question.

Shizue:  Ah.  To what goals did the Teacher and the Son of Heaven aspire in their selection?

Okura:  You shall not believe me.

Shizue:  I shall!

Okura:  All extremes lead to disaster.  The Fortunes are extremity itself.  Yet it is by their favor that humanity has won its way into the Age of Man, so we must court disaster through worship of those extremes.  The Seven Fortunes are the least disastrous combination of extremities.

Shizue:  I... can see the disaster in tragic love, the immoral acquisition of wealth, the brutality of war… but certainly there is greatness as well as disaster.

Okura:  Indeed.  And that is the balance you seek.  Not between the Fortune’s values and your own, but between greatness and disaster.  And not the middle ground between them, but the future which encompasses both in equal measure.  Is that what you seek?

Shizue:  I… don’t know.

Okura:  Had you given any other answer, I would have sent you away.  But I think I can see the shape of your future.  I shall describe your destiny to you, and then you may decide whether to walk away.

End Scene

The description which Kitsu Okura gives in this fictional account of a real encounter is not strictly heretical, though it differs from how the 7 Major Fortunes of Good Luck are generally described.

With that being said, one concept which the wise do understand in Rokugan is the extent to which being closely connected with any Fortune, or indeed any divine being, profoundly changes any human being.  Someone might set out to gain the power of a Fortune because of some goals, and by the time they have attained the favor and power with which to accomplish that goal, they find their original plans no longer hold value to them.
