
One of my past campaigns involved the Moto family of the Unicorn clan, which are loosely based on the peoples of Mongolia (in the same way that Rokugan is based on Japan and partially Imperial China).

Moto religious practices are often different from those of the rest of Rokugan, and one thing that the PCs encountered was that the modern Moto are in the process of bringing back "the old ways", which involves worship of the Gods of Death.  Here is some information about this.

The number 4 is unlucky because it sounds like the word “death”. Rokugani often avoid it, e.g.

→ People never depart on trips on the 4th day of the month.

→ Buildings in Rokugan are “never” 4 stories, i.e. a basement either will or won’t be counted as a floor of the building in order to make the number of floors either 3 or 5.

→ Gifts which would normally be 4 zeni/bu/koku will be supplemented with lower denomination (e.g. 4 koku and 1 bu so the gift is 5 coins) in order to avoid the unlucky number. The exception is a threat – a gift of 4 of something is considered a threat in Rokugani culture just as a gift of a weapon in considered a threat in Moto culture.

It is therefore fitting that there are 4 Gods of Death – given the significance of the number, how could there be any other number? However, of the 4 Gods of Death, only 2 are recognized in the rest of Rokugan, and the others appear unique to Moto teachings.

Moto Gaheris, the daimyo of the Moto family, who is referred to by the Moto as "the khan of khans", carries 4 swords, each dedicated to a different god of death:
→ Bloodstorm, which Gaheris carries into battle, is dedicated to Emma-O
→ Lamentation, used for defense when attacked/ambushed by another, is dedicated to Enma
→ Lightning, used in single combat, is dedicated to King Yan
→ Retirement, used in executions, is dedicated to Wei Tin







We've already talked about Emma-O, the fortune of death, so I don't think I need to repeat that previous information.







Interestingly, Emma-O is the only one of the Gods of Death who is a fortune, and fortunes are part of the fabric of reality. Emma-O is not merely a god who happens to favor the concept of death, she literally is death. (To be more precise, she exists as the cycles and connection created by death which further shape and create death in turn.) It’s unclear whether this makes her the greatest of the Gods of Death – the Moto don’t seem to have seriously considered this question.

One thing I have tried to emphasize about these Moto religious practices is that they will probably seem frightening to outsiders, and cause many to wonder whether the Moto are behaving in a heretical manner outside the bounds of what is considered appropriate religions practice as determined by the Imperial Ministry of Rites.

For example, let's talk about King Yan, who the Moto also worship as one of the Gods of Death.

King Yan, also known as the King of Hell, is the one who judges the souls of the dead, determining where they will spend their time in the underworld until they are reborn. There are 8 greater hells and 16 lesser hells, and a King Yan sentences souls to spend time in one of these, or several in succession. This is said to be a necessary part of the process by which souls are purified and stripped of their connections to their previous life. Thus, while souls are indeed punished in the 24 hells of Jigoku, the process of a soul having its connections eaten by oni is not inherently a punishment, as it is what allows rebirth.

King Yan will send some souls who are worthy (especially those already close to enlightenment) directly into Yomi, the realm of the honored dead. It’s unclear whether Yomi is part of Jigoku or if it is a separate realm entirely – this is much debated by scholars. King Yan doesn’t appear to have dominion over Yomi, which has no oni need for any ruler. Yomi is where honored ancestors dwell, and damned souls which have completed their time in the hells of Jigoku commune with their own ancestors in Yomi before being reincarnated.

King Yan rules over all oni, and tsukai (witches) often pray to him. There is some debate among scholars over whether or not oni are themselves inherently evil, though it is heretical to say that oni are “not malicious”. This debate has relevance when considering the worship of King Yan:

→ Oni are thought to be the mechanism by which souls are purified prior to death, as they hunger for and eat away at connections between earthly things. An oni in Jigoku could therefore be seen as performing a holy work in accordance with the Tao.

→ On the other hand, an evil being can still be directed to act according to its nature while unintentionally serving a good and noble purpose. It’s unclear whether oni understand themselves to be eating away at the souls of the dead for the benefit of those souls – if not, then they are surely evil and any good they do is incidental to their intentions.

→ Of course, many oni are themselves unintelligent – some possess no more intellect than insects, others are as smart as dogs or horses, and only the Oni Lords have a human (or perhaps super-human) level of intelligence. The question of whether oni are inherently good or evil may therefore only be relevant to Oni Lords.

→ Just as animals come in different types and have enormous variance within a single species, oni too come in many varieties. It’s therefore possible that some oni are evil and others are not, or that some types of oni are inherently evil and others vary between individual oni.

→ Oni who are summoned into the mortal realm by bloodspeakers and other types of tsukai usually try to devour everything they can, though smarter ones may scheme to more effectively feed as much as they can while in this realm. This is unquestionably bad and wrong, as the essence of Jigoku (the Shadowlands taint) they bring with them corrupts and degrades all it comes into contact with, in contravention of the natural order.

The Vindicator clan, which deals with the occasional oni which makes it way into Moto lands along the western side of the Twilight Mountains, teaches that oni in the mortal realm are not evil, and should instead be regarded like rabid animals which need to be put down. Killing such an oni allows it to “return to where it belongs” and is therefore a merciful act, not only protecting its mortal victims but ultimately doing what is best for the oni itself to where it will thrive where the Tao prospers for it. The Vindicator’s hatred for all things Shadowlands is well-known, as they are the southernmost Moto tribe who has to deal with all of the Shadowlands denizens which make their way into Moto lands. Thus, their position is treated with deference even by those who disagree with them and find it foolish.

One thing that I've tried to emphasize, in this section and in other writings, is how even within the world of Rokugan with its many established doctrines, there is active debate about these matters.  Even with something as seemingly black-and-white, good-and-evil as oni (demons) from hell (Jugoku), there is much room for theological disagreement between different characters in the setting.







The next God of Death in my notes is Enma:

Enma was thought to be the Moto word for Emma-O, i.e. until the start of the campaign the PCs thought that they referred to the same being. The Moto describe Enma as “the guardian of the gates of Jigoku”.

As a reminder, the Bon Festival occurs on the full moon of the 7th month (Obon), when families invite back the spirits of their ancestors to return to them for one day and one night. This is a time of reunification for ancestors whose souls were in Yomi; for souls damned in Jigoku, it is a brief reprieve. The gates of the underworld are opened by the power of monks, who chant the sutras of the Shinseist canon for the entire week leading up to Obon.

The Moto claim that these monks are not opening the gates directly, but that their sutras entreat Enma to open the gates herself. This assertion has never been tested by the Imperial Ministry of Rites to determine whether it is heretical, so PCs should be careful before asserting its truth themselves. There’s no need to worry about simply informing others that this is a thing the Moto believe, though this may prompt others to demand that the PCs denounce this teaching and assert its falseness.

With that being said, Enma’s job is said to not be mainly about keeping the souls of the dead in Jigoku – rather she is tasked with keeping the living out! Of all the Gods of Death, Enma is the most strongly opposed to tsukai. When an oni is slain in the mortal realm, it is Enma who reaches up and pulls the oni’s spirit back into Jigoku. Someone in Karakoru made a comparison to Ryoshun, who is the “member of Lord Moon’s heavenly court who guards the entrance to the celestial heavens”. This fits with the understanding of Enma as someone who keeps outsiders from entering rather than a warden who keeps prisoners inside.

Enma is said to keep mujina as pets, or perhaps she simply enjoys and favors them as creatures she finds delightful and beautiful. (Mujina are the trickster spirits of Jigoku in the same way that foxes and tanuki tricksters in the mortal realm.) The Moto claim that this is why mujina are the only creatures able to travel freely between the mortal realm and Jigoku.

One subtle detail I tried to include there is that because the Moto speak a different language from the rest of the Empire (though most of their educated nobles also speak Rokugani), there is a lot of room for confusion around things like the names of different gods.  Many Rokugani encountered Moto references to Enma and reasonably assumed that this was the Moto translation of Emma-O.  This raises similar questions about a lot of gaijin gods - for example, if encountering a traveler from the gaijin city of Medin al Salaat, if that gaijin refers to some god from their pantheon as The God of Love, a samurai might assume that this is another name for Benten.  And they will probably be correct, since Benten as a fortune is part of the fabric of reality and therefore omnipresent in the mortal realm, though there is room for misunderstanding and there are other possibilities as well which might not occur to the samurai and lead to confusion later.







The final God of Death is Wei Tin.

Wei Tin is called “the lord of ghosts” and has dominion over all spirits who have returned to the mortal realm prior to being reincarnated. A few notes/explanations/reminders on ghosts in general:

→ Ghosts can come from either Jigoku or Yomi, though ghosts of both types may be angry and vengeful. For example, ghosts from Yomi may haunt their own descendants if one has somehow disgraced their family, or alternatively may help an honored descendent by haunting one who has unjustly opposed them. Matsu no Moyu Kazushi is an example of someone from the 1st legion who is widely believed to be haunted by the vengeful ancestors of his enemies (though he denies this).

→ Many hauntings are not vengeful, and may be the result of damned souls from Jigoku reaching out for help and counsel. Doji no Tsume Toyohiro is an example of a member of the 1st legion who is haunted by the ghosts of his fallen comrades, with whom he frequently speaks and tries to comfort.

→ All ghosts are hungry. This is why bowls of food are left out for ghosts with chopsticks pointed in the air, especially during the Bon festival or at other times when ghosts are thought to be present. Whether a ghost is friendly or upset (or both!) feeding it will help prevent the ghost from being distracted by its hunger.

→ Many Jigoku ghosts are able to manifest in this realm because they have lingered after visiting on Obon, while others have been able to temporarily escape hell somehow. Honored ancestors from Yomi are able to visit whenever they wish and need no special dispensation to leave the underworld to visit the moral realm.

→ Wandering ghosts can be sent back to rest through other means as well – the Moto claim to have originated the practice of “death riding”, which is a well-known Unicorn practice of sending a rider into the wilderness to drink and feast with the dead. Shinjo Inoru is the death rider for the Unicorn companies of the 1st legion.

Wei Tin is the lord of all ghosts, whether from Jigoku or Yomi. He is said to be the one who grants damned souls dispensation to leave Jigoku for a time to haunt the mortal realm. Specificlaly he is said to “deal with” these souls, which may “bargain with” Wei Tin in exchange for his help.

While souls from Yomi do not require Wei Tin’s help in reaching the mortal realm, the Moto claim that they still often require assistance in finding their mortal descendants, especially those who have not been able to e.g. burn the correct type of incense which can act as a beacon to ancestors during the week of Obon. Thus, he also bargains with honored ancestors, helping alert them to the needs of their living descendants and assisting them in locating the times and places where they may most effectively intervene on their behalf.

One of the ways in which Wei Tin is said to help is by assisting in possessions. If you hear of a man who has suddenly and unexpectedly cut his own throat or drunkenly broken his neck falling off his own horse, the Moto say you can be assured that Wei Tin helped a vengeful ghost possess him at the opportune moment. Similarly, when people find themselves possessed in battle by ancestors who fight through them and for them as their strength begins to fail, Wei Tin may have helped an honored ancestor locate their descendant in the chaos of battle.

It’s unclear what exactly the souls of the dead have to offer Wei Tin in cases where they bargain with him. With this in mind, Moto who give offerings to Wei Tin do not do so directly – rather, they give offerings to their ancestor “that they may themselves pass these along to Wei Tin, the lord of ghosts”. Similarly, when the Moto slaughter a fatted calf and burn its flesh for their ancestors, they often burn extra “that their ancestors may themselves make offerings to Wei Tin”. With that being said, there seems to be an understanding that the dead are able to make further bargains with Wei Tin beyond using what the living pass along to them, and it’s unknown what those bargains entail.

Pilgrims to Bodi Kaikhan wishing to commune with the spirits of their honored ancestors pray to Wei Tin to assist them, and this is surely what Moto Gaheris must have done before swearing his vows and forging his covenant to the Gods of Death.

