
I'd like to describe the interplay of politics and religion in politics, using some specific examples using some specific examples from some of my campaigns.

For a thousand years the the city of Toshi Ranbo was the capital of the Damasu, one of the largest houses of the Akodo family.  In the year 1117 the domain was conquered by the Tsume, one of the largest houses of the Doji family.  Due to a severe flooding after a torrential rainstorm, the city was cut off from reinforcements, so the Tsume attacked with a huge army and took the city before reinforcements could arrive.

The attack was completely unprovoked, although the Tsume justified it by citing a recent insult which the Damasu had dealt them.  One of the bushi attached to the Tsume ambassador to the Damasu was caught smuggling opium into the city of Toshi Ranbo, and rather than turn him over to the Imperial magistrates to stand trial, the Damasu simply executed him.  This was highly improper as well as illegal, but the Tsume's response was hardly proportional.  Still, the insult was considered justification enough for the Emperor to refrain from intervening against the Tsume.

The Akodo made an attempt to take back the city with a huge army drawn from all across the clan.  However, in their rush to attack before the city could be re-fortified, the Lion failed to coordinate their forces properly.  Each general wanted the glory of being the one to take the city, and so they each threw all of their forces at the city, disregarding their battle plans.  When one general managed to breach the city walls, rather than redeploying their forces to assist her, the other generals instead continued to throw their forces at other parts of the walls.  They each assumed that the Lion would ultimately be successful, and no one wanted to be the general who failed to breach the walls themselves or be seen as riding on the coattails of another more successful leader.

Although the Tsume's own general was quite skilled, it was ultimately the leadership of General Doji no Doji Chuto that resulted in the Tsume's success in repelling the Lion forces.  Chuto was the commander of the northern armies of the Dojo and is an extremely patient and calculating tactician.  He discerned the lack of coordination among the Lion and adjusted his strategy accordingly.  When one attacking general managed to breach the city walls, Chuto predicted that the other generals would not reinforce him and instead focus on the more glorious goal of trying to storm other parts of the city themselves.  Thus, he deployed his men to fight the Lion forces inside the city district they had managed to breach, and only moved to take back control of the wall after defeating them on the city streets.

Further attempts to storm the city walls were ultimately unsuccessful, and eventually the Lion withdrew from their attack.  They had invaded too quickly to have established sufficient supply lines, and in the wake of their defeat at the hands of the Crane, the generals from distant houses saw much less chance for glory.  Before long, the attacking army dwindled as various daimyo ordered their forces withdrawn.

The Lion have not yet attacked again, but have not abandoned their claims to the city and have been biding their time and gathering their forces.  In the meantime, the Emperor reluctantly recognized the legitimacy of the Tsume invasion.  However, because the invasion was launched on flimsy pretenses, as a condition for legitimizing the invasion, the Tsume agreed that the Imperial magistrates in Toshi Ranbo would have expanded jurisdiction until the Emperor deemed that the city had returned to normalcy.

Toshi Ranbo is the third largest city in Rokugan, with a population of over 200,000.  3 years after the invasion, the city settled down somewhat and martial law was lifted, as it had been almost a year since the previous major riot.  The Imperial magistrate representing the Emperor was Hantei Fukuhashi, one of the Emperor's children by one of his concubines.  After a series of controversial rulings, he decided to spread out Imperial authority by appointing an Imperial magistrate to each of the city's districts.

That's the high-level background for one of my past campsigns.  One theme is the way in which military and political power interact with the precepts of honor and religion.  For example, the Emperor would prefer that daimyo do not invade their neighbors unprovoked or on flimsy premises, but once such an invasion has taken place, there might not be much that the Emperor can do without incuring significant costs.  The Crane clan would not want the Emperor to side with the Lion, nor would the Lion want him to side with the Crane.  The Emperor therefore, while he is quite powerful and has much influence, prefers to maintain the stability of his dynasty by acting as a referee on more specific matters, and allowing the clans to resolve their conflicts in duels or on the battlefield.  Then when the time is right, the Emperor can use his leadership to broker a lasting peace, which if he tried to do before the war started might fall apart too quickly and undermine both the peace and the perception of his authority and legitimacy.

All of that is intended to make sense through a political lens, but if someone in Rokugan accurately described the political situation that way, it would border on heresy!  After all, the Emperor's place in the celestial order should mean that his authority is absolute, and that all samurai should obey him in all things.  Even if a samurai has not directly sworn an oath of fealty to him, the idea that an entire clan would act to subvert him is not something that anyone would admit of their own clan... even if it's true!

I think this mirrors a lot of real-life dynamics in a lot of actual historical settings.  Societies have their religious precepts, but then they also have political and military realities, and those things are often in conflict.  And sometimes instead of actually being in direct conflict, there is a tension between how the head of state (who until recently in history was often a religious leader as well, such as the Emperor of Rokugan) is described in religious terms and what authority they actually have in practice.







During the period of time when the Tsume lifted martial law in the year 1120, a radical monk named Baiten was growing in popularity in the provinces surrounding Toshi Ranbo.  Baiten attracted fanatical followers who themselves became monks and went out to start their own ministries.  He was from southern Phoenix lands where he had spent a few years building up a ministry.  He had visited Dragonfly and Dragon lands before moving farther south towards Toshi Ranbo.

Here are some excerpts from my notes from this past campaign, which are written in the present tense, though all of this took place in the year 1120 of the Rokugani calendar:

Baiten is controversial for several reasons:

1) He often urges peasants (mostly tenant farmers) to leave their homes and families to pursue a monastic life, usually by starting or joining some charitable mission.  For example, the daughter of one of the village headsmen in the county of Hikobayashi raised some money and started a soup kitchen in the county township.  In some cases dozens of peasants from the same village or hamlet will walk away from their lives in mid-harvest to follow Baiten or to join whatever monastic communities he sends them to.

2) He preaches that the next Day of Thunder will soon arrive.  He says that he has no idea whether this will happen in a day or a year or a decade, but predicts that the forces of darkness are gathering.  Many samurai worry that this kind of talk will throw the peasantry into a panic.

3) His followers say that he's a prophet, that he has mystical healing abilities, that he's the descendant of Shinsei, that he has reached Enlightenment, and many other things.  Baiten himself tends to not deny these things, but not really deny them either, and many of the things he says or does tend to reinforce these beliefs.  For example, he claims to have the ability to interpret dreams, and many come to him to seek his wisdom in this manner.

4) Many of the monks and peasants he teaches end up saying or doing extreme things.  For example, the first round of censorship cases involved a follower of Baiten who went on a hunger strike.

A better example of Baiten-related controversy was the case which led to the Prince stepping down and instituting the Board of Justice.  One of Baiten's followers came to Toshi Ranbo and started a group devoted to educating peasants in religious songs and chants.  He eventually made a public speech in which he possibly said and/or implied (reports vary about precisely what was said) that the Prince would be like the next Iuchiban, dividing the Empire and aiding the forces of darkness through immoral and unjust actions.

This monk's followers denounced the speech and said that they had no idea he would give it.  However, the Prince still had every member of the group executed, which resulted in significant unrest.  Although Baiten himself was not directly involved in any of this, the Prince blames him for having mentored this monk in the past.

Baiten has never actually been to Toshi Ranbo, but he's making such a large splash throughout the province that the governor and prince have discussed how to handle him.  They fear the backlash that would arise if he was executed, but they are still considering it.  Alternatively, they may decide to have him imprisoned, possibly allowing him visitors and possibly not.  Most likely they would simply exile him from the province.  However, as of the beginning of the campaign they are planning on waiting to see what happens next, hoping that he'll move on and/or be less disruptive than they fear.

Here are some more excerpts from my old campaign notes, this time about a different monk, Grand Abbot Benshi:

Baiten the monk will be banished from Toshi Ranbo unless the PCs expend a significant amount of effort and political capital to keep him around.  However, when he leaves, he will proclaim to his followers in the province that the Tao no longer prevails in the city of Toshi Ranbo.  Most of the monks in the city leave, along with hundreds of peasants and even a few dozen samurai.

Governor Yasujiro responds by requesting that Grand Abbot Benshi journey to Toshi Ranbo and bring with him dozens of monks from his order.  Benshi is the Grand Abbot of the Order of Sadahako.  The founder of this order was a prophet who used art and song and plays and stories to spread the Tao; Sadahako was later declared the Fortune of Artists by the Emperor.

In many ways, Benshi is the opposite of Baiten.  He is fiercely orthodox, he emphasizes that peasants stay in their place, he is a political thinker who involves himself deeply in the affairs of government.  In other ways he is very similar to Baiten; he is constantly testing the limits of what he can get away with, he gives provocative sermons, he is quick to denounce wickedness.

Benshi will become a major force in the city, and the PCs will need to deal with the fallout of his actions in a number of ways throughout the campaign.

Grand Abbot Benshi will give a series of public demonstrations, each followed by a sermon.  He'll start relatively small and see what he can get away with, gradually escalating to more and more dramatic things.  In most if not all of these cases, he will even have local magistrates present during these demonstrations, who approve of what he's doing.

Benshi has his monks perform a series of controversial plays.  In one, the protagonist is a bandit who is a rather sympathetic character; although he eventually dies as a result of his banditry, he is a pious man who cares about his family.  Many object to such a conflicted message, feeling it gives the wrong message to the peasants, and the PCs must decide whether the censor the play.  However, no high-ranking official will be willing to publicly oppose the play, since the governor has mandated that city official cooperate with Benshi so as to not antagonize him.

Benshi's next play is even more provocative.  It involves several unscrupulous merchants who seem to be thinly veiled versions of real-life unpopular merchants here in the city.  They are eventually murdered by bushi as punishment for their moral failures; some of the bushi are punished and others are not.  Some local merchants are upset, feeling that this may be a call for bushi to take vigilante actions against merchants whom they perceive as sinful.

Benshi's first demonstration is significantly more outrageous.  A local wheat merchant known for price gouging answered a knock at his door to find Benshi and mob outside on the street.  They forced him to climb into a coffin, which they nailed shut and carried to the market square.  Benshi proceeded to give an hour-long funeral service for the wheat merchant, listing his transgressions and urging the audience to strive to avoid the same sins that led to the wheat merchant's downfall.  After a few hours they eventually let the merchant out of the box, where he furiously demanded that Benshi be punished for this outrageous behavior.

The following demonstration is even more extreme.  A landlord who often neglects his properties and fails to make even basic repairs is confronted by a mob of his tenants, led by Benshi.  In order to show that such greed is not acceptable, Benshi leads the peasants in "symbolically" running the landlord out of town... which consists of actually chasing him out the city gates.  The landlord returned to find that his office had been broken into and his lockbox smashed and the money there had been taken by Benshi and distributed to his tenants.  He angrily petitions the magistrates to censure Benshi and return his stolen rent proceeds.

Benshi has another demonstration which he'd like to perform but knows he could not do without express permission.  A wealthy sake merchant has a large estate outside the city, near the large expanse of rice land which he owns.  The tenant farmers who work this land have long complained of his unfair demands; for example, he does not allow the farmers who work his land to eat any of the rice they grow, saying that this rice is too good for them, and they should spend their own money to purchase rice grown elsewhere.  Benshi wants to soak the man's house in sake after kicking him out and have the farmers each light a fuse and burn it down.  However, this would require support from both some high-ranking city officials.

The above are all examples of the kind of tension between religious and political authority that we've discussed.  I am curious though about what the particular religious justifications would be.  It's certainly not traditional to nail someone into a coffin or incite a mob to drive them out of the city, even if this is done in a ritualistic way that avoids any direct physical harm coming to anyone.







Now it might be worth talking a bit about the structure of Rokugan's civil and religious institutions.  Although this isn't directly relevant to the cosmology of Rokugan per se, one of the things I try to emphasize in my worldbuilding is the way in which Rokugan's religious doctrines, beliefs, and institutions still have to deal with the reality of politics and temporal power.

For example, a running theme is that in theory the Emperor's authority is supreme and that none would question or oppose the Emperor's wishes, but that in practice people have their own loyalties and incentives and which might sometimes run up against this.  And while it's extremely rare for someone to declare open rebellion against the Emperor's authority, people still find ways to work for their Clan or Family or House or Lineage insterests even if the Emperor would wand them to do otherwise.  Similarly, even if the Emperor would rather the Lion/Crane war not happen, it's rare that he would try to simply order an entire clan to cease military operations, lest he accidentally convince an entire clan that he is against them and sides with their enemies.

The original L5R sourcebooks make a few references to the Imperial government and the Imperial courts and such, but the details are mostly left vague.  This is usually fine, since most tabletop RPG adventures don't require either the players or GM to delve into the details of such things.  However, as I've been running L5R campaigns for over 20 years, I've found it useful to flesh out a lot of the details, since sometimes we do run adventures where the structure of Rokugani government is relevant, and where knowing who reports to whom or which ministers have what authority affects the choices and decisions which PCs and NPCs would make.

As I said, my own version of Rokugan does follow the basic structure from the original L5R source books, though we have made a few slight modifications and also greatly expanded the specificity of what ministries exist, how different people are appointed, etc.  In particular, since Rokugan at a high level is a fantasy setting whose culture is inspiried by Imperial Japan and whose geography is inspired by Imperial China, we drew some inspiration from the Ming Chinese system of the Six Ministries for fleshing out the specifics of Rokugan's government.

Rokugan has 7 Great Clans, each of which has 3-5 Great Families.  Most of those Families have a ruling house and a number of vassal houses.

For example, one of my campaigns takes place in Damasu lands.  The Damasu are a vassal family to the Akodo family.  Thus, all Damasu samurai have the Akodo name, e.g. their previous daimyo was Akodo no Damasu Kojima.  Note that Akodo is the family name, "no Damasu" indicates that he is "of the Damasu" vassal house, and Kojima is his personal name.

There are 15 ranks of of the samurai caste in my version of Rokugan.  (This is more than in the published books, but we found that we needed more than the original 10 ranks to encompass all of the layers of government.)  The Emperor, of course, is of the Fifteenth Rank, which we would refer to in conversation as "rank 15".  A lowly samurai who has just passed their gempukku and not yet been assigned to a significant government post would be rank 1.

Here's a rough list of the ranks of extremely high-ranking people:

Rank 15: the Emperor (and no one else)

Rank 14: the Imperial Chancellor (usually from an Imperial family but currently Kakita Yoshi), and all 7 of the Clan daimyo (sometimes called the Clan Champions)

Rank 13: The ruling daimyo of the great Families, e.g. while Akoto Toturi is of the Fourteenth Rank due to being the daimyo of the whole Lion clan, Ikoma Tsanuri is of the Thirteenth Rank, as she is the daimyo over the entire Ikoma family but is subordinate to Akodo Toturi.  Imperial Ministers are also Rank 13.

Rank 12: a House daimyo, i.e. the daimyo of a vassal family of one of the Great Families, e.g. before his death Akodo no Damasu Kojima was of the Twelfth Rank.

Within a single House such as the Damasu (most domains are vassal domains, so this is a "typical" house), here is the typical rank structure:

Rank - Position
------------------
12 - Daimyo
11 - Chancellor
10 - Minister
9 - Deputy Minister
8 - Governor
7 - Provincial Minister
6 - Deputy Provincial Minister
5 - County Magistrate

I realize that this doesn't exactly follow the original published L5R books, but we tried to build on a combination of different historical settings and combined that with what was already established for Rokugan.

The Six Ministries exist at the Imperial level, the Clan level, the Family level, the House level, and at the provincial level (each House is divided in provinces, and the provincial government is divided into the Six Ministries as well).

In general, the Chancellary sets policy, and the Six Ministries implements policies.  At the Imperial level, the Imperial chancellary is composed of a chancellor from each House in the Empire.  However, not all chancellors are equal.  There are some matters where only the 7 Clan chancellors get a vote.  In other cases, all of the 29 Family chancellors from the 7 Clans get to vote, as well as the 4 Imperial Family chancellors from the Imperial families of the Hantei, Seppun, Otomo, and the Miya.  However, for most matters every chancellor from every House in the Empire gets to vote, which means that around 350 chancellors weigh in, which includes all of the vassal houses and minor clans.

Note that I am talking about "voting" as if this was a legislative body, though in theory the role of the Chancellary is supposedly to advise the Emperor, who makes all decisions.  However, there are two reasons why this is not true in practice.  First, with around 100 million human beings living in the Empire, the Emperor does not have time to weigh in on all decisions which come before the Chancellary.  Second, the Emperor's power is not as absolute in practice as their religious tradition claims it is, and therefore if the Chancellary overwhelmingly recommends a course of action to the Emperor, he is likely to approve it rather than impose his will upon his subjects on an unpopular manner that might offend his most powerful nobles.

With that being said, the Emperor still does weild considerable authority, and in any particular case he would almost certainly succeed if he defied the will of any particular clan or faction.  The Hantei dynasty does not make a habit of doing this, because it is preferable to cultivate the loyalty of all of his subjects over the centuries, so as to maintain the stability of their rulership, but occasionally it might be called for to take some drastic or unpopular action.

Thus, in practice the Imperial Ministers are tasked with implementing policies recommended to the Emperor (who mostly rubber stamps those recommendations in most circumstances), and those policies are set by the representatives from all of the daimyo of all of the major and minor clans and families of the Empire.

The Six Ministries are (in no particular order): the Ministry of Rites, the Ministry of Revenue, the Ministry of Retainers, the Ministry of War, the Ministry of Works, and the Ministry of Justice.

For each ministry, I will describe how it functions at the domain level, e.g. for a vassal family such as the Damasu, and then give some notes on the Imperial Ministery.







I'll start with the Ministry of  Rites:

In addition to overseeing shrines, temples, festivals, and the general ceremonies and religious obligations of the domain, the Ministry of Rites tracks births, marriages, and deaths of all the daimyo’s subjects, samurai and peasant alike. When a peasant moves from place to place, they are obligated to register with a local temple, who records where they have come from. Admittedly, this requirement is often “honored more in breach than observance”, and monks rarely make the effort to confirm that someone is who they say and come from the location they claim, except when they have reason to be suspicious of someone.

Every village district has a “country monk”, every county town has at least one “preceptor”, every provincial city has at least one “provincial abbot”, and every domain capital has at least two grand abbots. These shrines and temples are overseen by the Ministry of Rites, and the priests and monks who hold these positions therefore do work for the ministries, though they are typically peasants rather than samurai, who report to the samurai ministry officials who oversee them.

The Imperial Ministry of Rites is responsible for deciding which doctrines are accepted, which are open to debate, and which are declared heretical - while Clan, Family, House, and Provincial ministries of Rites may be tasked with enforcing these edicts, it is not for them to say which religious views do or don't constitute a heresy.  They also help the Emperor perform the most important rites and ceremonies throughout the year to help maintain the favor of the Fortunes and other kami.

Next I'll review the Ministry of Revenue, which oversees the collection of land taxes, business license fees, import tariffs, etc. A minister of revenue has a certain tax obligation based on the holdings they oversee, and is required to supply that amount to their daimyo (or governor at the provincial level) every year. If they collect more than this amount, they may keep whatever is left over. In hard times when the daimyo’s subjects are unable to pay their taxes in full, the minister must make up the difference out of their own pocket, to ensure a reliable stream of revenue for their daimyo.  If the individual does not have enough to make of this difference, their lineage is expected to provide it, and if they cannot then this person is likely to lose their position to be replaced with someone with the foresight to save up for lean years.

This is also how things work for Governors and County Magistrates, and generally any kind of tax collection position or office which generates revenue.  Officials are expected to meet their obligations to the government, and when they do well they keep what is left over, and when they do poorly they must draw from their personal or family fortunes in order to ensure that the financial obligation is met.

At the Imperial level, the Ministry of Revenue oversees Imperial tax collection.  Consider a vassal domain such as the Wakashi house of the Ikoma family.  The Wakashi owe taxes to those above them, which come to:
-> 2% of their land tax revenue to the Ikoma family daimyo, Ikoma Tsanuri
-> 3% to the daimyo of the Lion clan, Akodo Toturi
-> 5% to the Emperor

The Ikoma Family Ministry of Revenue, the Lion Clan Ministry of Revenue, and the Imperial Ministry of Revenue all have representatives in the Wakashi domain to oversee this collection.  Although these numbers make up a relatively low percentage, they add up to quite a lot of wealth, and of course a domain such as the Wakashi have other obligations as well, such as fighting for their clan in times of war, and contributing lengionnaires to the Imperial legions, etc.

The Ministry of Retainers handles stipends and tracks the rank of all the daimyo’s samurai retainers. Administers civil service exams, and assesses candidates for promotions. For high-ranking positions (usually Governor or above and often County Magistrates due to the revenue associated with that position), the Ministry of Retainers will administer exams to eligible candidates, and then the Chancellary will select from a small pool of those who scored the highest.

Note that at the level of a domain, the House Chancellary is composed of representatives from the major lineages of a domain, generally 5-10.  I think I've explained the concept of a "lineage" before, but to review, samurai associate themselves with a notable ancestor who founded a lineage.  In some cases these lineages date back to the original warriors who swore fealty to the Great Ancestors and their retainers.  For example, after Daidoji swore fealty to Lady Doji at the dawn of the Empire, he helped conquer territory in her name.  A local warlord named Aki saw the wisdom in accepting the gifts of civilization offered by the Empire, so he swore fealty to Lord Daidoji.  To this day, the Aki lineage is a powerful faction of the ruling house of the Daidoji, and the Aki chancellor represents their interests on the Daidoji chancellary.

The Ministry of Retainers thus plays a key role in lineage politics and promotions.  When fleshing out the setting, I decided that I wanted civil service exams to be part of the structure of government (this is of course based on Imperial China rather than Imperial Japan), but we blended this with the samurai culture of Rokugan by making it common for the Minsitry of Retainers to submit the top applicants for a government post, at which point the House chancellary can vote.  In some cases positions will be awarded purely on merit, and in other cases there will be a lot of political deals and "horse-trading" and such.

At the Imperial level, the Imperial Ministry of Retainers performs this role for Imperial posts, and it also awards accolates, commendations, and other forms of Imperial recognition for those who need to be rewarded with various honors and titles outside of being granted government posts.  For example, Kitsuki Fu was recently awarded the Order of the Precious Crown for her service to the Emperor in the Forgotten Tomb, which is the highest commendation that can be awarded to anyone below the rank of daimyo.

Now let's move onto the Ministry of War: Ministers of war general the armies of their domains. They oversee the manufacture of weapons, armor, and other instruments of war. They maintain the stables and horses which are needed in wartime, and maintain maps of their land as well as their neighbors’ territories.

The Imperial Minister of War is also known as the Shogun.  All of the Imperial Ministers tend to have many titles, e.g. the Imperial Minister of Revenue is also known as the Imperial Treasurer, the Imperial Minister of Rites is also the High Priestess of Amaterasu, etc.

The Imperial Minister of War oversees the Imperial legions.  Some of these positions are largely ceremonial, though there are also over 20 legions stationed on the Kaiu Wall, assisting the Crab clan in their defense of the Empire against the Shadowlands.  The legionnares are largely drawn from the Clans, though the leadership of the legions are usually from Imperial families, especially the Seppun.

Here are the duties of the Ministry of Works: Overseeing the construction and maintenance of public works, such as roads, lighthouses, aqueducts, harbors, etc. This includes fortifications such as walls, moats, watchtowers, and other things which will be used in wartime. It usually includes the construction of other public buildings used by other ministries such as granaries. Shrines and temples are usually the responsibility of the Ministry of Rites.

Ministries of works are given a budget and then expected to meet their construction and maintenance obligations. If they come in under budget, they are able to keep the excess – when things go over budget they are expected to make up the difference out of pocket. This is how budgeting works generally for all government posts in Rokugan, and thus Minister of Works can be a position almost as lucrative as the Ministry of Revenue, though in cases of large budget overruns a Minister of Works might need to tap into their lineage's family fortunes in order to avoid the humiliation of failing to complete a project.

This system means that a lot of behaviors which in a modern society would describe as "embezzlement" (or theft or other forms of misappropriation) are actually just Rokugan working as expected.  If a government official manages to negotiate a good deal on some raw materials, they pocket the extra money and everyone knows that's how things work.  This is not just true for those in charge at the top, but also for people in charge of smaller departments within the Minsitry.  For example, someone in the Ministry of Works for Damasu lands is tasked with specifically purchasing and transporting stone from Asako quarries to the city of Toshi Ranbo to improve its fortifications.  That person has been allocated a budget based on estimates of how much such things have cost in the past and are likely to cost, and if he can manage to negotiate for less or find a way to transport the stone more cheaply, then he could make himself quite rich as a result.

This kind of thing is especially true in the Ministry of Works, but it also applies to other Ministries as well, when officials are given a budget.  For example, consider how many things need to be purchased by Ministry of War to maintain its military readiness: food, animal feed, horses, weapons, armor, etc.  This system of budgeting applies almost everywhere and to almost all government posts in Rokugan at every level.

At the Imperial level, in addition to performing these kinds of usual duties for the capital city of Otosan Uchi the Ministry of Works contributes significantly to the upkeep of the Kaiu Wall protecting the Empire from the Shadowlands, and also the construction, maintenance, and staffing of waystations on the Imperial roads.  There are over 50,000 miles of Imperial roads in the Empire, and many of them have a waystation staffed at every mile to protect against bandits and maintain law and order for travelers.







The Ministry of Justice oversees street policing, bandit patrols, magistrates, courts, jails, and other aspects of both the civil and criminal justice systems.

At the Imperial level, the Imperial Minister of Justice is also known as the Emerald Champion, and is chosen through the Test of the Emerald Champion, a tournament in which the best duelsts from all over Rokugan compete - the intention is that the Emerald Champion be the best duelist in the Empire, because this is the person who duels on behalf of the Emperor himself.

Such duels were more common early in the Empire, when the Emperor's authority was less respected.  However, even in modern times, an Emerald Champion might travel to places where a dispute is causing headaches for the Emperor and "go fishing for a duel".  While neither party in a dispute would openly challenge the Emperor's authority, the Emerald Champion might make a personal determination about who is in the wrong, and then proceed to berate that side savagely, putting them in a position where they must either submit to the judgment of the Imperial Ministery of Justice or lose a tremendous amount of face... or challenge the Emerald Champion to a duel.  And since the Emerald Champion is the greatest duelist in the Empire, this option is a last resort, and the Emperor is thus able to influence disputes without needing to personally intervene or make rulings.

Every domain in the Empire has an Imperial magistrate whose duties are outlined in the Emerald Charter.  The Imperial magistrate also oversees tax collection for the Imperial Ministry of Revenue, coordinates the recuitment of troops for the Imperial legions on behalf of the Imperial Ministry of War, etc.  In order to perform all of these duties, Imperial Magistrates have a large staff of Imperial yoriki ("assistants").

This is not only true at the Imperial level, but at the Clan and Family level as well.  Consider the Wakashi domain of the Ikoma family.  Shiro Wakashi, their capital has:

-> an Imperial Magistrate, whose duties I described above
-> an Ikoma Family magistrate, who oversees Ikoma family tax collection and manages Family disputes
-> a Lion Clan magistrate from the Akodo family, who oversees Lionm clan tax collection and manages clan disputes

Consider when two samurai in the Wakashi domain become embroiled in a legal dispute:
-> if both samurai are from the Wakashi house, then it is a local matter, and handled by the Wakashi Ministry of Justice
-> if the samurai are from different houses of the Ikoma family, then the Ikoma Family magistrate hears the dispute
-> if the samurai are from different families of the Lion clan, such as a Matsu having a dispute with an Ikoma, then the Lion Clan magistrate handles the dispute
-> if the samurai are from different clans, then the Imperial magistrate handles the dispute

Accounting for these different types of disputes are why every domain has magistrates representing all of these different levels.  However, such magistrates are always stationed in the domain's capital, so two people having a dispute out in the provinces of the Wakashi domain would need to travel to Shiro Wakashi in order to have their case heard.

Although none of the details about the Six Ministries directly relates to the religious concepts of Rokugan's cosmology, it's all important context for how temples are structed, how religious and civil authorities interact, and the ways that religious views run up against the way that society actually operates in practice.  This is intended to be a major theme in the setting of Rokugan.








