
One interesting thing to explore is the difference between the fortunes and the elemental kami.  The latter are the elemental spirits of air, earth, fire, and water which inhabit all physical things.

Shugenja can communicate with the elemental kami much more directly than anyone can communicate with the fortunes, as the elemental kami are generally smaller.  The Elemental Dragons which are the manifestation of the elements are closer to the fortunes in this regard, and are much more difficult to communicate with, even in situations where they physically manifest.

This came up in my previous campaign because a shugenja used their powers to interfere in a duel.  Here is something I wrote about this to explain shugenja and their wisdom and magics and how they interact with Rokugan's legal system:

Shugenja are extremely rare. In most clans, about 1 out of every 10,000 samurai is a shugenja. Since most domains have about half that number of samurai, about half of the domains in the Empire don’t have even a single shugenja.

Shugenja are extremely valuable. A daimyo who loses a shugenja has usually lost their only shugenja, so they’re typically extremely protective of their shugenja, above and beyond most of their other retainers.

Shugenja are human. They make mistakes and sometimes get into trouble, but as samurai they occupy roughly the same place within the celestial order as other samurai, though as priests rather than warriors.

There is no stated legal doctrine which will tell any magistrate that shugenja are treated according to different rules than any other samurai, but when you combine the above facts you end up with a system which is extremely slanted in their favor. Even an Imperial magistrate who isn’t the one losing a shugenja must understand how deeply he will anger any daimyo whose shugenja he takes away, whether through the death penalty or exile or imprisonment or forced pilgrimage or lengthy remunerative service.

Most magistrates, even Imperial magistrates, will go to extreme lengths to avoid depriving daimyo of their shugenja. Legal historians can name a number of situations in which Imperial magistrates went too far and made rulings so egregiously biased towards shugenja that their rulings were actually overturned on appeal. Rulings are only overturned in the most extreme circumstances, but the fact that a number of such cases even exist shows how far most magistrates will go to shield a shugenja from legal consequences. 

All of this despite the fact that in theory, shugenja are not to be treated any differently than anyone else who interfered in a duel, since there aren’t actually any laws, standards, or precedents saying that the rules are different for shugenja in this regard.  This is typically worked around by shugenja not being allowed to even witness duels, due to the possibility of them magically interfering.

With that being said, there are a few important cases involving shugenja and duel interference, even after it became standard practice for shugenja to be universally disallowed from being present during duels, which mainly came about in the 3rd century after one or two especially egregious cases of duel interference. (Notably, it’s not actually illegal by Imperial decree for shugenja to avoid being present, though most daimyo have standing orders to this effect.)

Isawa Ejuko was the Elemental Master of Water at the beginning of the 8th century. She was a romantic who loved to see people marry their soulmates, and swore a vow to Benten to perform marriage ceremonies for any star-crossed lovers who asked it of her. Ejuko performed such a marriage ceremony for her friend Kakita Konishiko to her friend's lover Kakita Torikago.  Konishiko was already betrothed to a man named Doji Reju, so a challenge was issued by Reju to duel Torikago to the death.

An Imperial magistrate ordered that the challenge must be answered, and that the duel would be fought to the death, so that the winner would be free to marry (or stay married) to Ejuko’s friend Konishiko. The magistrate ordered that the matter would be decided by duel “once and for all” on a certain date on which the duel would take place.

Ejuko called upon the water kami and created a torrential rain on that day, preventing any possibility of a duel to occur. When questioned, she declared that the kami themselves were angered by the efforts to separate this husband and wife, though it seemed clear that she herself had provoked this anger and that the kami were angry as as result of her request as the Master of Water that they show their anger.

Ejuko was ordered back to Phoenix lands so that she could no longer interfere with the duel, which was allowed to go forward. She was not punished, though she was admonished for having interfered with a valid duel, and it was made clear that even the Master of Water would have suffered the displeasure of the Emperor had she interfered with a duel already in progress.

Fun fact: if not for having been ordered back to Phoenix lands as a result of this ruling, Ejuko would not have been in the right place to marry Mirumoto Asijin to his true love Isawa Maroko. This was yet another case of Ejuko performing a marriage for someone already betrothed, which led to Akodo Yokutsu leading an army north in retaliation, resulting in the Battle of the Tonbo Plains, which resulting in the creation of the Dragonfly minor clan.

This shows the ways in which the elemental kami are held in high regard, and yet the ability of shugenja to influence them means that their apparent wishes cannot necessarily be weighted as heavily as the will of e.g. the fortunes.








