
A recurring concept in my setting is that people who encounter supernatural entities are "touched" by the experience, in ways which can be seen as both a blessing and a curse.

For example, I was looking at some of my notes for a past campaign, in which Kuni Isamu was a Witch Hunter who visited the Forgotten Tomb, a "between place" which exists simultaneously in the mortal realm and in Yomi, the realm of the honored dead.  While he was there, he visited the Classrooms of the Great Masters to seek guidance and instruction on how to be a better Witch Hunter and how to seek out bloodspeakers.  He was granted new insights and abilities but as also changed in ways which impaired his perception and ability to communicate.

Here's what I wrote about how this worked after it happened:

Some of this is vague and Isamu will need to discover over time the
exact mechanics and how to trigger these newfound abilities, but
here's what he knows now about what he's learned how to do:

1) Isamu gained some ability to detect through interrogation whether
or not someone has a connection to bloodspeakers.  A lot of cases are
cracked not by interrogating bloodspeakers themselves, but by finding
out about suspicious activities from their neighbors and relatives.
Unfortunately, even innocent peasants are typically fearful when being
interrogated by Witch Hunters, which makes it hard to figure out who's
actually hiding something.  Isamu has gained a "supernatural"
ability to discern through successful interrogation rolls whether
someone is connected to a bloodspeaker, though he will have to figure
out the normal way whether that connection is as a friend, neighbor,
relative, customer, etc.

I put "supernatural" in quotes because the great scholars would say that the difference between a
"natural" and a "supernatural" ability is a false distinction which
demonstrates several fundamental misunderstandings about the nature of
reality.  On the other hand, the Shinsei once said, "All explanations
are false, but some explanations are useful."

2) Bloodspeaker covens are often connected by members who move back
and forth between covens in different cities.  Tracking these
movements is tremendously difficult and Witch Hunters are rarely able
to follow these chains and take down multiple linked covens in
succession.  Isamu has gained a "supernatural" ability to see the
patterns in a single coven such that with successful investigation
rolls he can discern the next city in the chain.  He won't know where
in the city to look, but when combined with his first ability, it
should be significantly easier to find the "needle in the haystack"
and the continue the process.

3) Witch Hunters already know the following things about Bloodspeaker covens:

-> Bloodspeakers trace their "lineage" through their teachers.  For
example, the name "Jama no Iuchiban Kohaku" indicates that Kohaku was
instructed personally by Iuchiban, and the name "Jama no Kohaku
Hoshiko" indicates that Julie's character from the peasant campaign
was personally instructed by Jama Kohaku, etc.

-> Different bloodspeaker covens therefore tend to be in different
"families" in the sense that their lineages could theoretically be
traced back to different lieutenants of Iuchiban, though much of the
time the coven itself wouldn't even know which one.

-> There exist ideological variations between bloodspeaker "families",
e.g. some covens seem to treat murdering samurai as a noble goal unto
itself, while others treat it as a means to an end.  This is not well
studied or understood, supposedly because the existing research hasn't
yielded more effective techniques for hunting bloodspeakers.

-> These "families" were founded after Hiruma lands fell during the
invasion of the Maw.  Evidently the bloodspeakers involved (led by
Jama Kohaku) "protected" the peasants in Hiruma lands from the
invading army and led them safely back into the Empire, but told them
that anyone who wanted to join them as apprentices could learn how to
wield the dark power they had witnessed.  Apparently so many peasants
took them up on this that most bloodspeaker covens that exist today
can be traced back to the peasants who accepted this offer.

Interestingly, Isamu had no idea that any of this was true, but in the
Classrooms of the Great Masters this was presented as being existing
knowledge already well understood by the Witch Hunters, which implies
that for whatever reason this is a part of history which is kept
secret even from most Witch Hunters.  Isamu has no idea why this would
be the case, since it doesn't seem like particularly dangerous
knowledge for Witch Hunters to have.

Isamu has gained the "supernatural" ability to understand the
different bloodspeaker ideologies, which will allow him to create
"family trees" of covens over time.  Not only that, it would allow
Isamu to understand the differences of opinion that exist between the
different groups of bloodspeakers, and how closely the different
groups work together.  Isamu can see a few ways in which this could
lead to being able to hunt bloodspeakers more effectively, and the
Great Teacher who gave this lecture promised that this was somehow the
key to truly understanding bloodspeakers (though this claim seems hard
to believe).

However, as we've discussed, there are advantages as well as drawbacks to seeing the world more clearly.  Isamu lost "three aspects" of the underworld skill, though each aspect
of perception he lost is cross-cutting and relates to other skills as
well.  It will take him quite a lot of time to figure all of this out,
but here's what he'll come to understand about what he lost within the
next few years:

1) KNOWLEDGE
Isamu no longer understands the distinction between something being
legal or illegal.  This applies to physical objects,
actions/behaviors, ideologies, etc.  None of this affects Isamu's
drive to hunt bloodspeakers or fight the Shadowlands, since he was
never motivated to do those things out of regard for the legalism of
it.  Still, he's not going to comprehend what other people are
babbling on about when they talk about legal precedents and such.

Some would argue that Isamu has gained something here rather than lost
anything.  All distinctions are false (though some distinctions are
useful), so it's plausible that Isamu now understands the world so
much better than everyone else that he has cast aside the simple
untruth of "legality" and now perceives the world closer to how it
truly exists.  His difficulty in communicating with others would
therefore not stem from his own lack of understanding of a basic
concept, but rather due to others' failure to grasp a much more
complex concept which only Isamu comprehends.

2) PERSUASION
Isamu can no longer construct persuasive arguments (e.g. make open or
contested rolls) involving investigations into anything covered by the
underworld skill.  This does include bloodspeakers.  He can still
indicate a course of action he believes to be best, and he can still
respond to patient questions if someone wants to ask for details about
what factors led him to believe in that course of action.  Someone
else could therefore argue on his behalf afterwards based on this
knowledge.  However, if he was put on the spot by someone who
disagreed with him, he would be incapable of arguing the point in a
way that would be persuasive.

Since Isamu is capable of arguing about other things, and since he's
capable of explaining himself on things related to underworld, this is
further evidence that he hasn't "lost" anything but is instead now
operating on a higher level than everyone else.  The reason why he
cannot engage in persuasive argumentation might be that he now
possesses an understand deeper than language can express, and he
therefore cannot use this understanding to persuade anyone who lacks
his insight into the true nature of the world.

3) PERCEPTION
Isamu can no longer perceive physical contraband.  In other words, if
a physical object is illegal, he won't be able to perceive it's
existence.  He could be standing next to a giant pile of opium or
watching people gamble over a dice game or look directly at an
obsidian sword and have no idea that anything illegal was in his
presence.

This is probably the best evidence *against* the argument that Isamu
is now simply operating on a higher level than everyone else.  It's
hard to see this as anything other than a handicap.  However, perhaps
more study would reveal some deeper truth about this "disability"
which would show it to not be that simple.  Like I said, the above
explanations are simply what Isamu will come to understand within the
first few years of living with these newfound perks and quirks.







One thing I strive for in my worldbuilding is consistency.  I'd like to be able to introduce new concepts without contradicting existing principles.  Or alternatively, if something is introduced which appears to be a contradiction, then I want that to appear to be a big deal, since a new thing of that nature should cause characters to be shocked and unsure what to believe or think.  I sometimes discard ideas which don't seem to be consistent with the setting.

On the other hand, cool and "wild" ideas can still work if they are integrated well into the underlying concepts.  Here's another plot hook that I use in a past campaign which I was happy with, so hopefully you can help me evaluate whether it fits well into the setting.  This was the follow up to the backstory of Kitsuki Fu, an NPC in a previous campaign:

Eight centuries ago, there was a tsukai who lived in the forest east of the Shrine of Perfect Contentment, in what is now the Takaba falconry preserve. Masayoshi (the monk who is the Bearer of the Golden Seal of Amaterasu) suspects that Takaba was this tsukai’s name, because this was the name of the forest before it became a preserve for falcons, and the origin of that name has been lost while most other names from the region can be found in the Daidoji histories.

Takaba lived centuries before Hantei Iuchiban became the first bloodspeaker, and thus he had no way to conceal the Shadowlands taint that his witchcraft brought into his body. However, the Emperor’s subjects were less vigorous in prosecuting tsukai in those days, so Takaba was able to practice his craft in the solitude of the forest. He was sometimes sought out by peasants and samurai alike who desired his aid.

One day he found that his obsidian knife had disappeared. He performed dark divinations to discern its whereabouts, and tracked it to a nearby village, where it was hidden in the barn of a farmer. The farmer denied having stolen the knife, and Takaba believed the denial, confident that such a man wouldn’t dare steal from him.

When Takaba returned to his forest cottage, he found that his silver chalice was missing, despite the wards and underworld guards he had set upon his home. He immediate worked to strengthen the wards and summon additional dark entities to watch over his house. However, when he returned from finding his chalice in another barn of another farmer, his obsidian knife had again been stolen.

Takaba set about studying the ways of wards and traps, experimenting with different principles and practices to fortify the protections he had set. Still, every time he left to recover a stolen object, he would find another possession missing.

This continued for years, as Takaba drove himself to master the art of warding. One day he returned and found that one of his magical snares had succeeded in catching the fox which had been burgling his home. However, even after years of offenses, Takaba could not hate the fox, who had only been acting according to her playful and mischievous nature. She offered him “a fox’s promise” that that if he let her go, she would never trouble him again.

Takaba knew what a fox’s promise was worth, but he still set her free, unable to bring himself to harm her.

The fox continued to burgle Takaba, and he continued to try to thwart her. In their battle of wits, Takaba would sometimes succeed in trapping the fox, and she would sometimes succeed in stealing his implements only to abandon them elsewhere for him to recover. As their contest continued, the two of them reached new pinnacles of mastery of their crafts. Takaba became the greatest practitioner of wards and bindings that has ever lived, and the fox became the most accomplished of any of her kind in the ways of stealth and shapechanging. Takaba would ward his cottage such that naught but air and light could enter or leave, and the fox would change herself into a gentle breeze carried upon the moonlight. Takaba would forge an unbreakable snare which would bind a leg and prevent the leg from changing into anything else, and the fox would shift into a five-legged creature and chew off her now-extra leg to escape unharmed.

As this continued over the years, the two of them fell in love, and had many children together. Some of their human descendants continue practicing maho witchcraft in the Daidoji domain to this day, while their fox descendants continue to play tricks on farmers and travelers in the Daidoji countryside.

One day Takaba had a brilliant insight – even not knowing the true name of his fox-wife, he could nevertheless construct a ward that would bind any intruder, not by their physical form, but by pinning their name itself. And so his fox-wife was trapped, and unlike all of Takaba’s other successes, which she was able to eventually outwit, this one seemed insurmountable. Takaba’s ward seemed to be based on principles which were unchallengeable in their power over that which was bound.

Eventually the fox had an idea of her own. She stole into her husband’s cottage, and after being pinned by her own name, she chewed her name off from her very self. Such a thing should not be possible – even people who give their names to bloodspeakers are still connected to that name, and this connection remains even after death. A thing without a name literally cannot exist in this realm, which is why oni require names in order to be summoned.

Still, while all known principle and doctrine declare this impossible, the fox succeeded. But having overcome the final ward which could ever trouble her, she was now without a name, and so she began to fade away, becoming less and less herself. No longer truly a fox, she was becoming something else. As this happened, her hunger increased, and she found herself consuming the very essences of the foods she sought to eat.

Eventually Takaba realized that it was names that his wife hungered for, so he began to feed her the unused names he had taken as payment for the years of his practice. But the small names of peasants proved insufficient to satiate his wife’s savage hunger, so he fed her larger and larger names. As he did so he turned his research towards how to bind one of these names to her permanently, in order to replace her true name which had been lost. He swore by all his power that she would be restored and that her suffering as the Nameless One would cease.

In the course of his research, Takaba tried to record the names he had fed to his wife to understand what satisfied the most, and how big a name had to be in order to temporarily sate her hunger. He quickly found that he could no longer remember any name once it was fed to her, and any written record of that name quickly became blurred and illegible. Further inquiry revealed that living people whose names were eaten in this way were themselves forgotten, even by their closest family. By consuming their names, Takaba’s fox-wife had severed their connection to the world, dropping their souls into the underworld without even the memories of that life, forgotten by the world itself.

Takaba eventually devised a ritual that he believed would restore her to her previous form, but it would require a name larger than any he possessed, including his own. He set about to use the last of his resources to ambush Yasuki Kiringu, the daimyo of the Yasuki family, which was still part of the Crane clan at that time, as he returned from a trip to Kyuden Daidoji.

With Kiringu’s name eaten, the world continued with his brother Yasuki Tsanumi as the Yasuki daimyo. Indeed, the world continued as if Tsanumi himself had always been the daimyo, with no one remembering that Kiringu had ever been born. Tsanumi was much angrier at the Crane clan for their lack of support than his brother had been – Kiringu had taken the ruling on heretical farming practices in stride and valued long-term stability more than responding to loss and insult. However, with Tsanumi as daimyo, the Yasuki seceded from the Crane clan and joined the Crab clan, to the shock of the whole Empire.

The Emperor’s most talented advisors and soothsayers were caught off guard. Not only had his political advisors been confident that the Yasuki would avoid such drastic action, even the Emperor’s prophets had been unable to see this coming. Apparently the changes to the world caused by the feasts of the Nameless One stand above prophecy itself, affecting the world’s futures in ways even they cannot perceive. The Hantei immediately dispatched members of the Order of Amaterasu to investigate how such a thing could have happened.

Takaba meanwhile was able to perform his final ritual, sacrificing his own life and name to bind his soul to the soul of his wife, uniting the two of them into a single being. This ritual was powered by the name of the Yasuki daimyo, and for a time it seemed that it had succeeded. The fox was once again able to walk through the Takaba forest, even as the world forgot her husband for whom it was named, and she began to remember that she was a fox. However, while this ritual had done more than any names fed to her, it too faded over time and her hunger eventually began to return.

It is unknown how she was trapped by the Emperor’s agents. A prison for the Nameless One was built in the Forgotten Tomb, but no one knows who could have constructed such a thing. Her prison could hold only a soul with no connections to any names, and the principles by which that is even possible were only later discovered by the Emperor's wisest smiths by examining the construction of this special prison. It seems clear that whoever succeeded in imprisoning her was eaten in the process, possibly having sacrificed themselves to ensure the success of their endeavor. Their sacrifice is commemorated in secret by the Order of Amaterasu, though the name or names of whoever is responsible can never be known.

Several years ago, Moto Tsume led an attack on the Forgotten Tomb, attempting to enter it through its entrance in Yomi, the realm of the honored dead. He failed, retreating with his forces in tatters, the honored ancestors who guard the tomb emerging victorious. However, his spiritual assault sent dark energies of death into the Forgotten Tomb, rocking its foundations, and weakening the prison for the Nameless One enough for her to escape.

She first ate a legionnaire at Beiden Pass, who was tracked by Kitsuki Fu. She ate a few others as she regained her strength, eventually making her way home to the Takaba falconry preserve, where she ate the County Magistrate of Kanto in the province of Akishi. Daidoji Maku subsequently replaced him, with no one having any memory of his predecessor.

As a servant of Yozo, the fortune of legal justice, Masayoshi has tracked her this far, learning much of the story of how she came to exist from her descendants among the foxes and bloodspeakers of the Daidoji domain. He has struck a bargain with them to work together for the common purpose of finally putting their ancestor to rest. The bloodspeakers provided a powerful artifact of great name to act as bait, while the foxes set to work searching for the telltale signs of a life had fallen out of the world to locate someone those close to someone she had replaced.

The PCs were the only people found who perfectly fit the criteria of people most suitable for battling the Nameless One. They were lightly connected to the previous county magistrate of Kanto, having served him for only a few months before he was eaten. They later became close friends with Maku. That combination of being connected with weak-but-still-present ties to someone eaten and strong ties to someone who “replaced” that person was ideal for warding them against being eaten themselves, though the danger would still be great.

Masayoshi set wards and traps around a totem of great name provided by the bloodspeakers of the Daidoji domain. He knew his wards and traps could only delay rather than ensnare the Nameless One, who laughed at traps even in the days when she was merely a clever fox. But they would stall her long enough for the PCs to confront her and cleave away the names she had eaten, allowing her soul to finally descend into the underworld and continue on its journey through the cycle of death and rebirth.

Everything I just wrote was the setup to a supernatural adventure which I was happy with.  I did have some concerns about how some of the details violated existing lore or established principles of the setting.  Consistency is key, however I hoped that by making the violations so shocking in-universe, it would emphasize that the general principles of the world stand, but that sometimes things still occur which are beyond our understanding.  Hopefully this indicates not that established doctrines and principles are wrong, but rather than human understanding of them is incomplete, and supposedly "impossible" things are still possible (but extremely rare), such as the existence of a Nameless Fox, or her actions evading the Sight of the Emperor's most gifted prophets.






The generic term I use for things like dream quests are "spirit encounters", since it not only encompasses dreams, but also certain types of supernatural battles, such as the fight to permanently put the Nameless One to rest.

Here's a little more information from my notes on Spirit Encounters, which I hope will help provide context for future work when I ask you to help me generate content.

Spirit encounters are divided into “scenes”. Much like scenes from a dream, the PCs will usually understand where they are and have some sense of what’s happening around them, even if they don’t remember how they specifically arrived in their current location or how they could get back to it later. Scenes are divided into rounds – sometimes a scene will last until an objective is completed, an other times a scene will last for a predefined number of rounds.

Every character takes a single action each round. In the first round of a scene, each PC chooses a single physical ring: Water, Fire, Earth, or Air. The round progresses through those rings in that order. Spirit encounters are turbulent, and PCs take ongoing damage as the encounter continues, though this damage depends on which Ring is chosen.

→ Water: these actions always include the “evaluate options” action, which helps the party discern what actions they have available to them. It’s advisable for someone in the party to take this action early in an encounter. Other Water actions let the PCs influence the scene directly. A PCs who chooses the Path of Water automatically takes 5 damage per round, in addition to any additional wounds taken by the action they choose.

→ Fire: these actions are the most directly effective, but also the most dangerous. They always include things which directly accomplish the goals of the scene, but you take the most damage. People who choose the Path of Fire add an extra die to their pool of rolled dice, and automatically set that die to a 10, which is then rerolled as normal, but also takes 10 damage in addition to any wounds taken from the action they choose.

→ Earth: these actions have their rolls divided in half, making them less effective than other rolls, and sometimes may only give bonuses to someone else’s action rather than directly accomplishing anything. However, these actions tend to cause less damage to the person who takes them, and people who choose the Path of Earth take no automatic damage.

→ Air: these actions usually react to what others are doing, whether that means giving more information about the scene, reducing damage dealt to another PC, or boosting their roll like an Earth action would. Players who choose the Path of Air take 5 damage if they take an action, however since Air is the final element to resolve its actions a player who chooses this path may choose to forgo their action and take no damage.

PCs choose their elemental path at the beginning of the round, but they are not required to choose the specific action within that path until their turn. Thus, PCs acting in later paths may use information gained in the earlier paths to inform their decision of which action to take.

At the end of each round, players choose the path they take on the next round, with one restriction: they may choose any ring other than the one "opposing" their path on the previous round. In other words, someone who chose the Path of Water may choose any path other than the Path of Fire for the next round. The exception is that any PC may choose the Path of Void to go to an opposite ring (e.g. Air to Earth) – if they do this then the skills they roll will be chosen randomly.  This randomness could hurt, but it could also help by enabling a PC to choose an action which uses skills they don't possess, and allowing them to count on the randomness of the Path of Void to hopefully increase their chances of success.

The idea above is to incorporate the various underlying concepts behind the 5 rings into these rules.  The references to "damage" and "wounds" is spiritual rather than physical, and is what I meant when I talked about impairing someone psychically to raise the stakes.

There's an additional type of damage which can be taken in Spirit Encounters, which is that of "connection damage".  For example, in one dream quest from a past campaign, the PCs found themselves in the Court of the Caliph of Medin al Salaat.  After gaining information in previous scenes, they had the option to exit the dream safely, or proceed to the third and final scene, in which the Caliph and her factions were eating dinner.  Here was a description I wrote of that scene:

It is said in Medin al Salaat that it takes 4 people to prepare a salad.  A generous person to add the oil, a stingy person to add the vinegar, a wise person to add the salt, and a fool to mix them all together.

Here you can see that the Caliph is the generous person, offering not only her hospitality but immense material support to the Uru in their conflict with the Moto.  The Dahab are stingy, in the way that merchants often are - while they are the main source of the money which is funding the Uru, they wish to know the use to which the Uru will put it.  The Old Man of the Mountain is the wise man here, advising the Uru and Caliph alike, and ensuring that the Houses of Dahab get the answers that will keep their coffers open.  And as for the Uru... considering how they have found themselves thrust into a losing war which seems to benefit everyone except themselves, it would be difficult to ascribe to them any role but that of the fool.

If the PCs chose to enter this scene, they knew that they would no longer be risking "skill damage" of the sort that Kuni Isamu took, but rather "connection damage" which strikes at the ties that bind them together with other people and groups.  Instead of simply learning about secrets and wisdom, they have the opportunity to directly affect the waking world on a spiritual level but disrupting the relationships between people and groups, at the risk of having their own connections damaged.

PCs who enter the scene and choose the Path of Water are able to strike at the Caliph's connections to her subjects, weakening the ties that bind her to one or more of the following:
-> the "outsider" factions such as the Ashalan, the Rashari, and the Khayal
-> the Qabal of the Sahir, who are famously apolitical and therefore have no direct loyalty to her, but who could still support or undermine her in various ways
-> her khadi retainers - it is unknown what exactly ties them together, but weaking these ties could prove most useful if Moto Gaheris eventually lays siege to this city

However, PCs who take a serious wound while in the Path of Water will find their own connections damaged, specifically those which tie them to their Clan.  What would it mean for such connections to be damaged?  Their family might find themselves thinking less of them, their clan-mates might suddenly hold them in less regard, their lineage might turn its back on them for small infractions.  This is the general idea behind the concept of "connection damage".

PCs taking the Path of Fire have the opportunity to disrupt the connections that bind the Uru together, including:
-> Timur Beg and his ties to Eguden Yeke - weakening this could cause the Eguden "ailay" ("tribe" - analogous to a Rokugani "lineage") to perhaps cease supporting the ruling Timur lineage
-> Timur Beg and his ties to Perhat Bugra - the Perhat tribe has continued to fiercely resist the Moto even after multiple devastating defeats, and if their connection to the ruling Timur was weakened then they would be more inclined to finally surrender once and for all rather than continue fighting in the war
-> Timur Beg and Caliph Hanan Talibah - this could go in both directions - Hanan Talibah could cease supporting the Uru and/or the Uru themselves might decide that their loyalty to the Caliphate which has supported them has been paid back in full by the blood they have already spilled, and that there is no need to further throw their lives away against the armies of the Moto

However, PCs who take the Path of Fire risk damaging their own connections to the Moto.  They have had to work hard to get the Moto to respect them and to not simply be viewed as untrustworthy outsiders.  If these connections were damaged, months of hard work and great accomplishments could be unraveled.

Anyway, there were also options for the paths of Earth and Air, but I figure that's enough context.  I mainly wanted to list those things as example of this concept of "connection damage".  In Rokugan, the Fortunes themselves are composed of the cycles and connections which make up the rhythm of the world and which connect and perpetuate the people and things in it, and this a person's connections in the right circumstances can be a vulnerable target which sometimes may be be directly attacked.








One thing that I tried to highlight to my players about the concept of "connection damage" is that while it is very real, it would be difficult to convince someone who was skeptical that the effect was actually happening, because the effects would be subtle.

For example, consider someone who had suffered connection damage that weakened the ties that bind them to their clan.  This happened to one of my PCs, Bayushi Saburo - other members of the Scorpion Clan were much more inclined to try to take vengeance in response to words or actions which they perceived as insults or betrayals.  And they were far more likely to interpret his behavior in this way.

For example, during the Battle of Coward's Torment, Saburo and the platoon under his command was heavily wounded.  As the acting lieutenant of his platoon, he was in the process of pulling his unit back into the reserves so that a fresh platoon could take his place on the front lines.

However, as he was doing so, he spotted a fellow Scorpion from a different company, Shosuro Yuzo, who had gotten separated from their squad.  She was also wounded and had fallen off her horse, and enemy forces were advancing on her.  Saburo had to decide whether to save her or continue pulling back.  He chose the latter, and Yuzo was killed.

This could have inspired harsh feelings under the best of circumstances, though as a military commander Saburo has great standing, authority, and expertise with which to argue that his actions were for the greater good of the unit and helped ensure their ultimate success in battle, and that it would have created an unacceptable risk for his army if he had broken ranks to save Yuzo.

However, because of the connection damage he suffered in his dream quest in the Court of the Caliph, his fellow Scorpion went far beyond petty forms of retaliation and instead began plotting a revenge which would discredit and publicly humiliate Saburo.

With all of that being said, note how subtle this effect is.  While the connection damage really did have a significant effect, if Saburo tried to convince someone that he was only being targeted because of the connection damage he suffered in his dream quest, this would be nearly impossible to prove.  He really did "abandon" a comrade to die in battle, and it's quite understandable that Yuzo's family might seek revenge for this, so nothing that happened as a result appears supernatural - it would all seem to an outside observer like the normal consequences of regular life in the 1st Imperial Legion.

This theme is something I've tried to create throughout my worldbuilding, where supernatural things are very real, but their effect is subtle, and often it can be difficult or impossible to tell someone's superstitions from a real event or effect.

I try to draw a lot of inspiration from these kinds of real-world stories, where claims of the supernatural may have gone unquestioned in the culture where they were made, but where skeptical historians might look back and conclude that nothing supernatural had happened.  This is often true even for historians who themselves believe or are open to the possibility of the supernatural.  Just because such things might exist doesn't mean that real-life scholars do (or should) take claims made in primary source historical documents at face value.

Consider the case of of Doji no Tsume Toyohiro, a legionnaire in the 1st Imperial legion:

Toyohiro distinguished himself in military service during the Lion/Crane war in the northern front. In particular, he commanded a company that repeled a group of tunnelers who were trying to literally undermine the walls of Kyuden Tsume itself. Most of his comrades died, and Toyohiro frequently sees both them and sometimes his opponents as he goes about his day.

Lately he’s taken to following where they lead, listening to what they have to say, and speaking with them. This has frequently taken him into the 6th Battalion, but the Lion have ultimately decided that he is the only Crane allowed to wander freely through their territory, because anyone who struck him down or even interfered with his journey might find themselves haunted by the same ghosts which pull him along. Matsu no Moyu Kazushi visited each Lion company to counsel this policy of non-interference, though he has suffered some mockery from non-Lion companies as a result.

Note how Toyohiro is seeing ghosts which other people do not see.  This plays upon themes I emphasize regarding ambiguity of the supernatural.  Tsume Toyohiro seeing ghosts which no one else sees could be interpreted as someone who isn't even haunted, but who has hallucinations due to what a modern person might diagnose as PTSD.  I've read that Roman legionnaires were sometimes described as being haunted by the ghosts of their former comrades - this doesn't fit the definition of modern PTSD as described in the DSM, but it does sound very much like a trauma response.

If a modern reader read a historical account of a real person with a story like Toyohiro's, then even if that modern person believed that ghosts exist, they might have cause to doubt that this historical figure was really haunted.  Nevertheless, while some people in the setting might wonder about whether every single once of Toyohiro's experiences is legitimate, few in Rokugan would dare to dismiss his wanderings, and it would be reasonable for other legionnaires to fear the prospect of becoming haunted if they interfered with his work.

Toyohiro has additionally sworn this vow to help himself in his ministry towards the ghosts which he sees:

"In the sight of Emma-O, Fortune of Death, and King Yan, the Judge of Souls, I, Doji no Tsume Toyohiro, swear a solemn vow. I am haunted by the spirits of my fallen comrades and opponents who met their ends during the Lion/Crane war, their souls trapped in unrest. I hear their voices and see their spectral forms, and I understand their struggle to find peace.

Thus, I swear to serve as their voice, their advocate, and their guide. I vow to listen to their tales, understand their plights, and offer comfort to their lingering spirits. I promise to do all that is within my power to help them make their passage from the realm of the mortal to the underworld, where they rightfully belong.

May Emma-O lend me the wisdom and the strength to honor this vow, and may he show mercy and provide guidance to the souls who have been lost in the tumult of war. For as long as I draw breath, I will not falter in this sacred duty. This I swear."

Even people who do not fear ghosts might worry about the prospect of interfering with his work after he swore that vow, because to do so might antagonize Emma-O or King Yan.  The particular effects of doing this might not be immediately apparent, but could anyone ever really be sure that this wouldn't bring future disaster?  This is an important type of ambiguity - most people would agree that interfering with such vows could bring misfortune, but it would be difficult for anyone to make specific predictions about what form this misfortune might take.







Or we could go back to the story of Otaku Mirai, another officer in the 1st Imperial legion:

Starting the night of his gempukku, Mirai was tormented in dreams by a mujina. This curse followed him to his first assignment as a sergeant in the 1st Imperial legion. At times he would go weeks without being able to sleep through the night.

One evening, an old man appeared in the Mirai’s dreams, identifying himself as the spirit of a neglected sword. Shockingly, the man was a gaijin who named himself Heartseeker. The old man additionally stated that he was unable to leave his scabbard as he had been defiled by dirty human hands. Most importantly, the spirit told Mirai that should he wish to permanently rid himself of the hateful mujina, he should clean the blade of its rust.

Mirai tracked down all of the gaijin swords in the legion, of which there were many, and identified and acquired Heartseeker from captain Otaku Hiyu, who had left it languishing in a crate of old antiques not considered worthy of display. It had originally been taken from a slain gaijin bandit many centuries ago.

Desperate to be able to sleep well again, Mirai carefully cleaned the blade. As he finished his eyes fell upon the decorative leg of a brazier in his room. In the flickering light it suddenly resembled the imp in his dreams! The freshly cleansed sword then moved by itself to lop off that decorative leg, thus freeing Mirai from his nightly torment.

Mirai carries this sword with him at all times, strapped to his back in the manner of a barbarian. When in his tent it occupies a place of honor at a shrine he has built for it back at camp, but he never travels without it. Being a courtier and thus not able to duel, he has taken to practicing with it and has developed his own fighting style. He has spoken of plans to eventually make a warriors pilgrimage to join Moto Gaheris’ army to better learn its techniques and adapt to other more civilized weapons, though many doubt that he will follow through on such plans, as many take this as the boastful talk of a teenager.

This is based on a real historical anecdote, but modern readers might not read that anecdote and think that a sword was really haunted by an imp.  Rather, they might believe that someone had a strange dream, then saw something in the flickering shadows, then thought that they had defeated some supernatural force, and then that belief was self-reinforcing and so he found himself no longer worried about being afflicted and was therefore no longer afflicted.

Even someone in Rokugan, who certainly believes that supernatural things exist, might doubt the accuracy of Mirai's story.

Or consider the story of Kakita Korihime:

Korihime is the daughter of Kakita Yariga, who was the executioner to Kakita Toshimo. She took up her father’s role as executioner, but found herself unusually susceptible to hauntings. After performing only a handful of executions, she took a demotion in order to serve as a platoon lieutenant in the 1st Imperial legion.

As far as she knows, all of the vengeful ghosts who were previously haunted her eventually made their way into Jigoku, and she reports no sightings after arriving at Chai Sedo, though she spends a considerable amount of the week of the Bon Festival in the temple.

Note that in this account, it's also unclear whether anyone else has seen the ghosts that haunted Korihime.  Indeed, a plausible explanation is that she spent some time as the executioner for the Kakita daimyo and found it so traumatic that she suffered psychological issues as a result, which manifested as her believing herself to be haunted.  Then when she moved to the other side of the Empire to take a new post where she was no longer forced to perform executions, her issues subsided and she was no longer "haunted".

I'm not saying that these mundane explanations are what is "really" happening in Rokugan.  Ghosts definitely do exist in Rokugan.  However, a theme that I have tried to cultivate when it comes to the supernatural is that some apparently supernatural things are real, some are just people being superstitious, and it's incredibly difficult to tell which is which.

Does that make sense?  One of the things I would like you to help with in my worldbuilding, in addition to generating vows, is generating supposedly "magic" items or helping craft supposedly supernatural backstories for NPCs.  And one of the most important qualities in that writing is ambiguity.

Here's the backstory for the famous sword Yamaoroshi:

The origins of this sword are unknown. Its known history begins with Mirumoto Tsuki, who was part of the army that defeated the Maw at the Battle of the Cresting Wave. Her own sword destroyed, she pulled the sword of a fallen comrade out of the Maw’s hide. The sword seemed to move under its own power, hacking and slicing into the Maw, especially when striking from west to east. When the final coordinated strike from the remaining warriors finally slew the Maw, Tsuki was the only member of the Dragon clan to help deal the killing blow.

She named the sword Yamaoroshi – “Wind Blowing Down the Mountain”. As the sword that slew the Maw, it gained great renown, and 150 years later made its way into the hands of a duelist named Mirumoto Tetsushi, who used it to defeat Kakita Senri, chief instructor of the Kakita dueling academy. Already an underdog in the fight, Tetsushi chose to face east into the morning sun, practically blinding him in the garden where they fought. Yet he emerged victorious, explaining afterwards that just as the Wind Blows Down the Mountain, so too does this sword desire to be striking in the direction from higher elevation to lower elevation, even when its wielder is standing on flat ground.

Yamaoroshi later became the family sword of Agasha Shigeaki, one of the companions of Agasha Kitsuki, and struck down several of the assassins bent on murdering Mirumoto Januko, the daimyo of the Mirumoto family when the Unicorn returned. Agasha Kitsuki was granted his own Family name, and so Shigeaki then became Kitsuki Shigeaki, and Yamaoroshi has stayed with the Kitsuki family ever since.

Note that this is sword is steeped in history and is many centuries old, and it is believed to not only benefit from excellent craftsmanship in its manufacture, but that the weight of its past deeds and accomplishments grants its wielder an almost supernatural advantage.

On the other hand... there aren't really any testable claims being made about the sword, exactly.  Even the explanation that the sword has a will to be striking "downhill" would be difficult to measure or prove.  Someone performing katas with the sword might say something like, "oh yes, I can certainly feel the sword's will and the way in which swinging it towards a lower elevation grants me additional strength, as it adds the weight of its desire to my strikes".  But that could easily just be the power of suggestion!

Again, my point here is not to suggest that the claims about the sword are wrong.  Perhaps they are correct!  But the crucial thing is that the claims are ambiguous enough that it's difficult to be sure.

As another example, consider a supposedly cursed item: the Armor of Fool's Regret, which is in the possession of Ikoma Akaho, a platoon lieutenant in the 6th battalion of the 1st Imperial legion.

The Armor of Fool’s Regret is a cursed suit of armor possessed by a kansen (usually an elemental spirit which has been corrupted by its own anger or some past wrong or circumstance) which has been in Akaho’s family’s possession for centuries. It has been determined that to destroy the armor would free the kansen to wreak havoc elsewhere. And when the kansen is not “fed” it grows angry and reaches out to cause mischief in its surroundings.

However, those who wear the armor (when the kansen is well-fed) are protected by the kansen’s presence. Wearers of this armor have never (yet) fallen in battle, even when suffering grievous wounds.

The kansen demands blood, and specifically hungers for being worn while the wearer is injured. Akaho’s platoon is therefore the dumping ground for troublemakers, and its members are punished by being beaten while wearing the armor. Those transferred to the platoon are beaten this way as an initiation. When a long enough time goes by without any disciplinary actions being required, members of the platoon take turns donning the armor and being struck to appease the bloodlust of the armor's kansen inhabitant.

While some new recruits suggest that the armor should be destroyed, this is rarely a good idea with cursed items, as that would let its resident spirit loose in the world to cause mischief elsewhere, with there no longer being any convenient way to keep it bound.

As before, there are strong, specific claims being made about the armor.  And yet the actual evidence is quite thin - the fact that the wearer of this armor has never fallen in battle doesn't prove very much, because that's true of many if not most suits of armor!

As for the kansen, even if a shugenja were to commune with the armor and determine that the will of its resident kami was indeed consumed by bloodlust... that doesn't necessarily prove that people need to don the armor and be beaten in order to appease the kansen, or that the kansen is capable of leaving its home and causing mischief out in the world.

In general, I think that what I'm describing is a version of Rokugan which is a "low fantasy" setting.  Magic and spirits and gods and the supernatural do exist in this world, but people's superstitions may often be far more common than the actual supernatural things which make those superstitions plausible.







Here are a few more supposedly magic items or cursed items which I've come up with, which I think may help provide additional examples of what I'm going for.

"The Candle of Tears": This technically refers to the candle-holder rather than candle itself.  Any candle placed in this candle-holder will find its wax dribbling down in two distinct trails, reminiscent of tear-marks on a crying face.  A grief-stricken ghost haunts this candle-holder, and as long as a candle is kept burning at all times, she will be kept satisfied.  The flame of the candle waves wildly when in the presence of a child who is in danger of dying from sickness, and The Candle of Tears is used by doctors to triage cases, but if the flame ever goes out before the candle has burned all the way through its wick, the ghost will become even more distraught and lash out at those around it.

This item is a good example of several different themes which we've discussed, which I will reiterate here:

-> Ambiguity.  The fact that the candle's wax will tend to dribble down in two distinct trails is fairly thin "proof".  Additionally, even a small breeze or change in air currents can cause any candle to have its flame "wave wildly" for a brief time, so it would be difficult to tell the difference between normal flickering and some sort of supernatural omen. 
 However, because Rokugan is a society in which people tend to accept supernatural explanations for everyday occurrences, it would be rare for someone to demand proof that the candle is really even haunted.

-> Usefulness.  There is good reason for doctors to make use of this candle.  Rokugan's medicine is primitive, so doctors have good reason to want supernatural help.

-> Necessity.  Although there is some potential downside to using this candle-holder, since a candle placed in the holder MUST be allowed to burn all the way down to prevent the ghost from lashing out, destroying the candle-holder would free the ghost which is bound to it, which would be even worse.

Not every cursed item or supernatural thing will have all of these qualities, but this is the kind of thing I tend to shoot for.


